---
layout: post
title: "Intro to Pain Science Part 1: Fundamental Concepts"
image: figure.jpg
---
**Introduction**

My goal with this series of articles is to provide a detailed and accessible introduction to pain science. In addition to being fascinating, learning about pain is vitally important, due to the huge worldwide problem of chronic pain.

Chronic pain is most commonly defined as pain that persists for more than 3 months. At any given moment, at least 50 million people in the US are experiencing it. ([Prevalence of Chronic Pain and High-Impact Chronic Pain Among ...](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6736a2.htm)). Low back pain is the most common; 70% of people are expected to experience it in their lives ([6.24 Low back pain](https://www.who.int/medicines/areas/priority_medicines/Ch6_24LBP.pdf?ua=1).) Even worse, global low back pain prevalence increased from 2005 to 2015, by 17.3% ([Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 310 diseases and injuries, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)31678-6/fulltext)), making it clear that despite near universal advancements in science and technology, the situation is not improving. Unfortunately, most people’s beliefs about pain are riddled with misconceptions, which makes the problem harder to deal with. Pain education is arguably the largest step that can be taken right now to address the problem of chronic pain.

Many fantastic, free resources to learn about pain science exist (ie [THE BRAIN FROM TOP TO BOTTOM](http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/d/d_03/d_03_cr/d_03_cr_dou/d_03_cr_dou.html), [Pain is Weird: A Volatile, Misleading Sensation](https://www.painscience.com/articles/pain-is-weird.php), [Reconceptualising pain according to modern pain science: Physical Therapy Reviews: Vol 12, No 3](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1179/108331907X223010)). However, many resources focus on exploring patterns observed in sufferers of pain without much underlying neurobiology, or present information in discrete modules that lack a logical sequential flow. Others are more of an overview of what is known about pain, without detailed explanations of the evidence. In the articles that I have written here, I integrate the underlying neurobiology with important phenomena experienced by pain sufferers. Also, when it is possible to do so concisely, I explain the evidence for claims that are made. While these articles are not necessarily the easiest or most fun-to-read ones out there, I believe that for many people, they will be most conducive to full internalization and grasping of the relevant concepts. More advanced resources and sources for general further reading are provided throughout the articles and at the end of each article.

In this first article, I define pain and discuss its importance as a protective mechanism. Then I provide the basic background neurobiology and anatomy and show that there is so much more to pain than just damage to the body. A noxious (damaging/potentially damaging) stimulus itself is only one component of a very complex and malleable series of events that ultimately leads to the perception of pain. I introduce a classification scheme including 3 general groups of factors that can all influence pain, which is very useful in article 2.

In the second article, I aim to show how the concepts introduced in the first article apply specifically to chronic pain, and to offer some broad implications for management and treatment. 2 extremely interesting questions about pain are also discussed.

In the third and final article, I show a much more in depth look at the underlying neurobiology of pain. This article is unnecessary for a strong grasp of the important concepts, and is more to satisfy curiosity for those who are very interested in the neurobiology behind pain. Parts of article 3 assume some background in biology, primarily with membrane potentials and basic neuron structure.

At the end of each article, there are a couple of tangents that relate to topics in the main bodies of the articles. These are very interesting, but not necessary to read to progress through the articles. Just to give a warning right at the start, the main focus of these articles is not to tell pain sufferers what they need to do. There are practical recommendations, but the main focus is understanding pain. Links to more directly practical resources can be found throughout the articles.

I cite [Wall & Melzack's Textbook of Pain - 6th Edition](https://www.elsevier.com/books/wall-and-melzacks-textbook-of-pain/mcmahon/978-0-7020-4059-7) many times throughout these articles. I abbreviate it as WMP.


**Contents**

What is pain and why does it exist?

The ascending pathway for pain

The brain is not a passive receiver: the role of psychological and contextual factors

Modulatory Mechanisms that are Independent of Psychological and Contextual Factors

Neurobiology of pain modulation in:

The periphery

The dorsal horn of the spinal cord

The brain

Summary

Tangents: An evolutionary perspective, gate control theory, colors are not real and trees don’t make sounds when they fall, the necessity of pain, decussation of nociceptive/thermal pathways vs touch/proprioceptive pathways

  

**What is Pain and why does it Exist?**

First, let’s get a working definition for pain. The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) recently released a revised version of their 1979 definition of pain. The new version: “An unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue damage.”  It can be seen in [this helpful infographic](http://s3.amazonaws.com/rdcms-iasp/files/production/public/images/Infographic_20200708_5_5_Final.pdf) along with supporting notes. Like for any important term, any proposed definition for pain will draw criticism, but for these introductory articles, this definition is more than good enough. To be honest, it would even probably suffice to just vaguely say that we all know pain when we see/feel it, for these articles at least. (Kind of like what [former Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart once said](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_know_it_when_I_see_it)).

Pain’s purpose is essentially to alert us that there is a threat to tissue integrity, and to promote action to avoid damage. While pain is often seen purely as a nuisance, it is actually an effective protective mechanism that is absolutely paramount to our survival and wellbeing. The best way to see this is to study those who are unable to feel it. This study ([An SCN9A channelopathy causes congenital inability to experience pain](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature05413)) has some very sad observations of a family with a congenital insensitivity to pain. One boy did “‘street theatre’. He placed knives through his arms and walked on burning coals, but experienced no pain. He died before being seen on his fourteenth birthday, after jumping off a house roof.” His decision to jump off the roof was likely influenced by an undeveloped fear of danger, caused by his lack of pain. Many family members “ had frequent bruises and cuts, and most had suffered fractures or osteomyelitis, which were only diagnosed in retrospect because of painless limping or lack of use of a limb.” In other studies on people who can’t feel pain, the observations are the same: these people constantly sustain serious injuries without even knowing it. These examples go to show the importance of pain to protect the body, and show why the ability to feel it has been naturally selected for throughout the history of life. The inherent nastiness of pain is the reason why it is so important; it effectively promotes action to stop it. Now let’s get an idea for how the experience of pain is generated.

  

**The Ascending Pathway for Pain**

It is self evident that noxious stimuli cause pain. Again, the purpose of pain is essentially to indicate that there is a stimulus that poses a threat to tissue integrity. Let’s look at the underlying neurobiology and neuroanatomy between a stimulus and the ensuing pain experience. Keep in mind that the following outline is extremely simplified and incomplete; it is meant only to give sufficient background to get started. Many more pieces will be added as the articles progress, and a much more detailed account can be found for those interested in the beginning of article 3.

Here is [an image to follow along with.](https://www.google.com/search?q=pain+pathway&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk03LsLLukQiokrhk6knkHVDnjFO5Yw:1590676126788&tbm=isch&source=iu&ictx=1&fir=J6Svmfc75YSbgM%253A%252CrRSf4VERXm08iM%252C_&vet=1&usg=AI4_-kQqAXMwA24irS2tk3ALdgVtlbrsFQ&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwi0hvWr4tbpAhWQgnIEHZGSCdAQ_h0wAXoECAUQBg#imgrc=YZytCcbgt-G8lM)

All throughout your body are endings of primary sensory neurons (some of the longest cells in the body) called nociceptors which are sensitive to noxious stimuli (stimuli that are damaging or potentially damaging). The three classes of noxious stimuli are mechanical, chemical, and thermal. Some nociceptors are responsive to only one of these 3 classes of stimuli, but most are sensitive to all 3. When a noxious stimulus is detected by a nociceptor, it generates what’s called an action potential, a kind of electrical impulse, which travels along the nociceptor toward the spinal cord. The action potential is the fundamental unit of communication in the nervous system. For any given neuron, action potentials are of a fixed magnitude, so information about the intensity of the stimulus is encoded in the frequency of action potentials (ie more frequent action potentials means a more intense stimulus). Along the way, this individual neuron is combined with other neurons, some specific for pain (nociceptors), others for other somatosensory modalities (touch, proprioception, thermal sensation) into nerves. Nerves contain tens of thousands of individual neuron fibers. These nerves all terminate in the spinal cord, where individual neurons form a synapse, a tiny gap between neurons for communication, with other neurons in the spinal cord which project up to the brain. At this synapse, nociceptors secrete a specific chemical called a neurotransmitter which binds to specialized receptors on the spinal cord neuron, causing it to fire action potentials. Higher frequencies of action potentials by the presynaptic neuron cause higher frequencies in the postsynaptic neuron, which preserves information about stimulus intensity. These action potentials travel up the spinal cord and into the brain. It is worth noting that the ascending pathway for signals originating from nociceptors is completely distinct from the pathway carrying information from regular touch receptors (see tangent ). In the brain (which has around 85 billion neurons), a huge network of neurons are activated in specific patterns in response to the incoming stimulus. These extremely intricate patterns of activity in the brain give rise to the perception of pain. (I’m aware that this last sentence seems [a bit like this](https://www.google.com/search?q=and+then+a+miracle+happens&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk02q3yn2_FnB_9hc7FInvaqDcG7Kzg:1593689314477&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiP1uKru67qAhVzl3IEHW_ABf8Q_AUoAXoECA0QAw&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=1KUkZ0n_rsQW-M), but there are [fundamental gaps in our understanding of](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_problem_of_consciousness) consciousness, and this explanation suffices for these articles.) Different regions of the brain are responsible for processing different components of the pain experience inducing localization, emotional response, and intensity.

To summarize: noxious stimulus activates nociceptor->nociceptor sends signals to spinal cord->activation of neuron in spinal cord that projects to brain->signaling to brain->brain generates pain experience. It is important to note that nociception is not equal to pain. Pain is the conscious experience generated by the brain, while nociception is the signaling up to the brain.

This pathway is very intuitive, which leads many to make the mistake in believing that it is essentially all there is to pain. It is easy to derive a seemingly satisfactory explanation for how pain works from the outline of this pathway. For example: A noxious stimulus initiates signaling to the brain, which interprets the signals as pain, in a 1:1 ratio to stimulus intensity. Until the 1960s, when the pioneering gate control theory (see tangent 1) was introduced, popular theories of pain were fundamentally the same as my previous sentence. They were essentially analogous to a rope tied to a bell that rings “pain!” Also, in discussions with a handful of people, a vague outline of this pathway was by far the most common answer I got. (Another surprisingly common explanation was that pain is a physical event at the site of injury that the brain becomes aware of. See tangent 2 for some fun.)

However, while this model may be sufficient to explain many simple instances of pain such as stubbing a toe, it falls apart for more complex cases, like most chronic pain states. Pain is infinitely more complicated than a noxious stimulus pulling on a string attached to a bell in the brain that rings “pain.” As we are about to see, it turns out that there are many ways by which pain-related signaling and processing can be modulated--either amplified or dampened. (From an evolutionary perspective, it makes perfect sense that these mechanisms would develop. See tangent 3). Thus, pain is influenced both by the noxious stimuli that induce it, and how the nervous system processes nociception resulting from stimuli. This means that pain is not necessarily always strongly correlated with noxious stimulus intensity. Modulatory mechanisms which make changes to “normal” processing may act instantaneously, or they may be long term changes that last for up to years (I use quotes around normal because it is kind of an arbitrary term). While they can be influenced by any number of specific things, it is useful to break these modulatory mechanisms into 2 groups: those that are affected by psychology and context, and those that are not. Keep in mind that this distinction is somewhat arbitrary, as our psychology and biology are inextricably linked.

  

**The Brain is not A Passive Receiver: The Role of Psychological and Contextual Factors**

Psychological and contextual factors can directly modulate how the signals are processed and en route to the brain. It is important to note that the effects of these factors are neurobiologically mediated; there is no magic involved in how they affect pain. Perhaps the best examples to illustrate this come from the book Explain Pain, by Lorimer Moseley and David Butler. Among the numerous crazy examples are a soldier in world war 2 who got an X-ray 60 years after the war which found a bullet in his neck that he never knew about, surfers who have had limbs bitten off by sharks who report feeling no pain at the time, and soldiers who had numerous severe injuries including lost limbs yet reported little to no pain (originally detailed here: [RELATIONSHIP OF SIGNIFICANCE OF WOUND TO PAIN EXPERIENCED](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/323093)). Presumably, the dramatic contexts and psychological states that these people were in affected the amount of pain they felt. There is also the crazy case (Fisher JP, Hassan DT, O’Connor N. [Minerva.](https://www.painscience.com/bibliography.php?nail-boot)  BMJ. 1995 Jan 7;310(70).) published in the British medical Journal in 1995, in which a worker jumped on a huge nail, which penetrated through his boot. He was in so much pain that he had to immediately be sedated. But, miraculously, it turned out that the nail had gone straight between his toes, leaving his foot completely intact. It was probably pretty awkward when he woke up. While these are extreme examples, the underlying principle of pain variability can be generalized to other, milder cases. You can probably think of many less dramatic examples yourself. These examples make clear the potential for context and psychological factors to either increase or decrease the magnitude of pain.

We also have high quality experimental evidence to further support this. In one study ([The Context of a Noxious Stimulus Affects the Pain It Evokes](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17449180/) ) participants’ necks were exposed to a -20 degree Celsius rod for 500 ms as a noxious stimulus, while looking at either a red or blue light. The mean pain rating on an 11 point scale given by participants for pain intensity and unpleasantness were higher when looking at the red light than the blue light by 3 and 3.5 points, respectively: very significant differences. In another study ([Bogus Visual Feedback Alters Onset of Movement-Evoked Pain in People With Neck Pain](https://www.bodyinmind.org/wp-content/uploads/Psychological-Science-2015-Harvie-0956797614563339.pdf)) participants with chronic neck pain used virtual reality machines that visually overexaggerated or under exaggerated their degree of neck rotation by 20%. When rotation was over exaggerated, pain occurred at 7% less rotation than without the machine. When under exaggerated, participants were able to turn their heads 6% extra without pain. Psychological factors (thinking their necks were in more/less extreme positions) modulated the pain experience. Much more evidence will be presented as we go along, but it is already abundantly clear from the above examples that the model of 1:1 damage/threat to pain is incompatible with empirical evidence.

As made clear by these cases, pain can be affected by psychological and contextual factors. What biological mechanisms allow for this modulation? Clearly, the bell-ringing model of pain is insufficient. One shortcoming of it is that it essentially paints the brain as a passive receiver of pain messages, rather than an active player in the process. There are two main groups of mechanisms that are likely at play here. First, it turns out that the brain sends descending neurons into the first synapse in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, which modulate the activity such that the ascending signals are dampened down or amplified. (ie the action potentials are reduced or increased in frequency). A valuable source of evidence for this pathway specifically mediating psychological factors’ effects on pain is research on placebo and nocebo (essentially negative placebo effects) effects, which work due to changes in psychological factors like expectations. This study ([PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19833962/)) found that “pain-related activity in the spinal cord is strongly reduced under placebo.” This one studying nocebo ([Facilitation of Pain in the Human Spinal Cord by Nocebo Treatment](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23966699/)) found that “comparing pain stimulation under nocebo to a control pain stimulation of the same physical intensity revealed enhanced pain-related activity in the ipsilateral dorsal horn of the spinal cord.” Because placebo and nocebo effects arise from psychological factors (and thus, the brain), these findings strongly suggest that the descending brain to spinal cord pathway is in use. This study ([Cortical responses to pain in healthy individuals depends on pain catastrophizing](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16427738/)) found that during pain induced by nerve stimulation, “prefrontal cortical regions implicated in the top-down modulation of pain were negatively correlated with catastrophizing,” suggesting that catastrophizing reduces descending inhibition.  This pathway will be discussed more later. Clearly, contextual and psychological factors play a role in the brain’s “choice” to use this pathway for pain modulation. Note that this is not to say something stupid like “You can use these pathways to think pain away.” Most of the brain’s functions happen out of the conscious self’s control.

Another interesting mechanism by which psychological and contextual factors can modulate pain is by directly changing the response of the brain neural networks involved with pain to incoming noxious stimuli. This may happen either instantaneously, or it may be a long term change. The previously mentioned study ([Cortical responses to pain in healthy individuals depends on pain catastrophizing](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16427738/)) also found that in healthy individuals, “there was a relationship between catastrophizing and activity in cortical regions associated with affective, attention, and motor aspects of pain.” However, this could very likely just be due to the fact that descending neurons dampened signals before they even reached the brain, so this is not clear evidence that the brain changed its own excitability. More research would be nice. For example, it is conceivable that a study which stimulated ascending neurons from the spinal cord to the brain by a set amount and measured the pain-related brain activity this signaling induced under different psychological states could be done. This would show whether the brain actually changed its own response to ascending signals. While we lack good direct evidence of this phenomenon, evidence from other areas in neuroscience makes it seem extremely likely that this happens. For example, during acute stress, it is known that some regions of the brain become more excitable. Similarly, sustained stress can induce neuroplasticity, making certain areas of the brain more excitable, and others less excitable. To give just one small example, sustained stress can cause increased excitability of a brain region called the amygdala, which is heavily involved with fear and aggression. Many other hormones associated with numerous psychological states can cause transient or long term changes in the brain. Existing synapses may strengthen or weaken (become more/less efficient), and new synapses can also be formed all throughout the brain. (Robert M. Sapolsky. “Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst.” Chapters 4 and 5) For pain specifically, there is much evidence that chronic pain patients’ brains undergo many structural and chemical changes, especially to areas involved in pain processing ([Chronic Pain: Structural and Functional Changes in Brain Structures and Associated Negative Affective States](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6650904/) and WMP Chapter 7). The significance of these changes is not fully known, but it is likely that they contribute to pain, and that some changes are influenced by psychological factors.

Also, it is important to know that human psychology is inextricably linked to human physiology. Our minds can strongly affect our bodies, and our bodies can strongly affect our minds in countless ways. To give two simple examples, ask yourself how good your ability to focus is when you’re starving, and think about times when your stress felt like it was destroying your body. So while the 2 aforementioned mechanisms are the most direct, there are likely many other ways by which psychological and contextual factors can influence pain. These probably include interactions with the endocrine and immune systems, which may behave in such a way that pain-related branches of the nervous system are affected.

Clearly, the pain experience induced by a given noxious stimulus is very plastic, and psychological and contextual factors can play a role in this plastic relationship by altering processing and signaling. Note that throughout these articles, I will group psychological and contextual factors together. Obviously they are different but long story short, for these articles, it is simpler to classify them together. Also note that the effects of contextual factors are mediated by the psychological factors that they induce, which are themselves mediated by neurobiological mechanisms. Again, there is no magic here; it all boils down to affecting neurobiology.

  

**Modulatory Mechanisms that are Independent of Psychological and Contextual Factors**

Again, pain is influenced both by noxious stimuli that initiate nociceptor signaling, and by modulatory factors, which essentially change the way that nociceptive information is processed in the nervous system. Many neurobiological factors that influence processing and signaling that occur independently of psychology or context can also play a massive role in pain. Generally, they do not instantly occur; instead, they are results of some past event like an injury or infection. They may also be affected by a large range of other things such as drugs and sleep. A simple example is the sensitization of nociceptors, such that smaller stimuli induce activation, and the same stimulus induces a larger response. You probably have personal experience with an example of this; think about the increased sensitivity around the area of a cut or bruise; light touches to the region may induce pain. Many studies ([Sensitization of myelinated nociceptive afferents that innervate monkey hand](https://journals.physiology.org/doi/abs/10.1152/jn.1979.42.6.1669)) have objectively measured decreased threshold stimuli for nociceptors following injuries. When someone is exposed to a given noxious stimulus before and after nociceptor sensitization, with all else being equal, the stimulus will induce more pain after sensitization; the pain-related parts of the nervous system have changed how they respond to noxious stimuli. Many more examples will be discussed soon. While I cannot give you super amazing examples of these factors like I can with psychological contextual factors, rest assured that these modulatory mechanisms are oftentimes actually much more important.

  

**Neurobiology of Pain Modulation**

I want to give a broad overview of some of the known neurobiological mechanisms that can aid in the modulation of processing and signaling of information from noxious stimuli (group 2 and 3 factors). Essentially, these mechanisms are the reason that a given noxious stimulus can induce different intensities of pain. Again, the variety of timescales on which these mechanisms act is very broad. Some are instantaneous, and others are long term changes to the nervous system that may persist for decades. Obviously, all of these factors boil down to neurobiology, but some are subject to the influence of psychological and contextual factors.

Mechanisms that are likely to be influenced by psychological factors are marked with a (*).

There are 3 general sites that will be discussed: the periphery, the spinal cord, and the brain. At each of these sites, the “main event” is explicitly stated. This is the thing that all the mechanisms are centered around. Also, the general ways by which they influence the “main event” are listed. A more in depth look at this topic can be found in article 3.

  

**The Periphery**

The main event of interest here is the actual firing of an action potential by the nociceptor; relevant mechanisms will change the likelihood of firing, and the frequency of action potentials.

A major phenomenon that causes allodynia (previously non-painful stimuli becoming painful) and hyperalgesia (an originally painful stimulus becoming more painful) in the periphery/site of injury is inflammation. (Henceforth allodynia and hyperalgesia will be referred to together broadly as “increased pain sensitivity.”) When an inflammatory response is generated for any number of reasons including injury or infection, certain chemicals are released into the tissue in what’s sometimes called an “inflammatory soup.” Many of these chemicals bind to specific receptors on the nociceptor like a key in a lock, causing specific reactions from the nociceptor. These chemicals can contribute to nociceptor sensitization by 3 general mechanisms: 1. Directly activating them 2. Causing changes in them that make them more easily excitable 3. Causing nearby cells to secrete chemicals that do either 1 or 2. (WMP Chapter 1). NSAIDS like Advil and Aleve work to reduce pain by preventing inflammation.

A major, long term way that nociceptors can become more excitable is by changing the specific proteins (especially ion channels) that they have on their membrane surfaces by altering gene expression. This can lead to sensitization long after inflammation and its associated chemicals are gone.

  

**The Dorsal Horn of the Spinal Cord**

The events in the dorsal horn are more interesting because there are synapses involved (recall that synapses are tiny gaps between neurons through which chemical communication is possible.) Ultimately, the most important event here is the firing of an action potential by the projection neuron which carries signals to the brain. The many diverse mechanisms relevant to pain here will all converge on making this event more or less likely, with higher or lower frequencies. Generally, they do this by either 1. Directly activating ascending neurons 2. Changing the amount of neurotransmitter released by the presynaptic neuron for a given frequency of action potentials, or 3. Changing the response of the postsynaptic neuron to a given amount of neurotransmitter.

To understand the possible mechanisms of modulation in the spinal cord, we need to add a group of relevant cells that were left out in the initial description of the pain pathway. In the dorsal horn there are tons of local neurons called interneurons which entirely stay within the spinal cord. In fact, in lamina 1 (the main specific section of the dorsal horn at which nociceptors terminate) about 95% of the neurons are local interneurons. (WMP chapter 5)

*First, like in the periphery, many chemicals can be released into the dorsal horn by descending pathways from the brain (see next section), interneurons, and immune cells which may work by any 3 of the aforementioned mechanisms. Some of the major chemicals involved here are endogenous opioids, which can both prevent neurotransmitter release from the presynaptic neuron, and inhibit activation of the postsynaptic neuron.

A particularly interesting mechanism makes ordinarily inhibitory inputs excitatory by altering ion concentrations of the cells relative to the extracellular space (see article 3).

Another distinct mechanism is called long term potentiation (LTP). Due to persistent nociceptor firing, the synapse can “strengthen” or become more likely to result in an action potential being fired by the postsynaptic projection neuron. This strengthening can persist for a long time, hence the name. This likely involves changes to the receptors on the cell surface and changes to gene expression. (Increased expression of certain membrane ion channels for the bio people). The inverse of LTP is long term depression (LTD). Note that these mechanisms exist all throughout the nervous system, and are exciting areas of current research on topics like memory and learning. See [2-Minute Neuroscience: Long-Term Potentiation (LTP)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-mHgPfXHzJE), [2-Minute Neuroscience: Long-Term Depression (LTD)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B7ig6sIwIC8), and article 3 for more details.

There is evidence that in states of increased pain sensitivity, some sensory neurons in the periphery that are normally sensitive to mechanical stimuli that are involved in our normal sense of innocuous touch change their spinal cord synapses such that they form synapses with ascending neurons involved in pain. This could cause gentle stimuli to induce pain.

  

**The Brain**

The brain is by far the most complicated of these 3 general sites. (In fact, it is possibly the most complicated piece of matter in the universe, but that’s a topic for another day). Unlike the other sites, the major event of interest here is not simply the firing of a specific neuron, but instead a very complex pattern of activity and changes across many regions. However, it is likely that most relevant mechanisms still boil down to the increase or decrease in propensity of firing in relevant neurons. Also, many of the understood relevant changes in brain activity actually ultimately act in the dorsal horn via descending neurons.

*A specific system in the brain called the PAG-RVM system is crucial for pain modulation. In 1969, it was discovered that direct electrical stimulation of this site caused analgesia (reductions in pain sensitivity) without affecting other bodily systems and functions ([Surgery in the rat during electrical analgesia induced by focal brain stimulation](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4887743/)). It sends descending inputs to the spinal cord and has a strong regulatory influence on the ascending projection neurons specifically associated with nociceptors. This activity can also be directly activated by injection of opioids into it. Interestingly, it can actually both amplify and dampen the processing of noxious signals.

*Feedback tracts throughout the brain: Throughout the brain, there are extensive tracts that feedback from higher order areas (more involved with cognition) to lower order areas (more involved with crude sensation and motor actions). The pain pathway in the brain has a very appealing one of these, from the ACC, an area that is partially responsible for emotions, and the aforementioned PAG-RVM system. This provides a potential pathway by which cognitive functions like emotions, stress, and expectations can affect the processing of sensory input. (WMP Chapter 7)

*The brain can simply change its response to ascending signals. Again, there have been many structural, functional, and chemical changes observed in the brains of chronic pain patients. These observations coupled with the research in other subjects like stress make it seem highly likely that this is a relevant phenomenon in pain. It is likely that LTP and LDP in the brain can play a large role in changes in the brain that are relevant to the brain. Again, this is an area of active neuroscience research.The brain can even theoretically induce pain, completely independent of nociception and without even intervening in the spinal cord. This idea is very interesting to me and I discuss some indirect evidence related to this in the next article. More research on this topic would be very interesting.

Again, the existence of all of these modulatory mechanisms makes perfect sense from an evolutionary perspective. See tangent 1.

  

**Summary**

The most important takeaway from this article is that pain is not necessarily reflective of the magnitude of a noxious stimulus. Any given pain experience is influenced both by the noxious stimulus that induced it, and how the nervous system processes it. Many factors can cause changes to how the nervous system processes nociceptive signaling (by inducing various modulatory mechanisms), but modulatory mechanisms can (somewhat arbitrarily) be broken into 2 groups: those that are affected by psychology and context, and those that are not. There are many neurobiological mechanisms for modulation, and they can act on a large range of timescales.

  

Thus, factors that can influence pain can be classified into 3 broad, general groups:

1.  Noxious stimuli (originating from outside or inside of the body)
    
2.  Psychological and Contextual Factors
    
3.  Changes to processing of noxious stimuli that do not depend on psychology or context (Mainly applies after an injury, but not necessarily)
    

The next article is structured around these 3 groups of factors and how they apply to chronic pain.

  

**Extra Helpful Resources**:

Nice site to explore pain neurobiology (and other neuroscience topics): [THE BRAIN FROM TOP TO BOTTOM](https://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/d/d_03/d_03_cr/d_03_cr_dou/d_03_cr_dou.html)

Excellent brief summary of contemporary pain science: [Joshua W. Pate: The mysterious science of pain | TED Talk](https://www.ted.com/talks/joshua_w_pate_the_mysterious_science_of_pain?language=en)

Great book: [Explain Pain (8311): 9780987342669: Medicine & Health Science Books](https://www.amazon.com/Explain-David-Butler-Lorimer-Moseley/dp/0987342665)

Nice site to explore: [https://www.painscience.com](https://www.painscience.com/)

Intro Neuroscience Textbook: [Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain by Mark F. Bear](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/170011.Neuroscience)

  

**Tangents**

  

**Tangent 1: The Gate Control Theory**

The gate-control theory, proposed by Wall and Melzack, was the first theory to propose a flexible relationship between noxious stimulus and pain magnitude. The popular talking point from it is its proposal that non-painful mechanical stimuli at a site of injury can cause inhibition of pain signaling in the spinal cord. Essentially, innocuous stimuli can work to inhibit nociceptive signaling. This explains why it hurts less when you rub a jammed finger. ([Gate Control Theory of Pain | HowStuffWorks](https://science.howstuffworks.com/life/inside-the-mind/human-brain/pain4.htm)) Numerous popular treatments of pain including TENS units are based on this theory. TENS units stimulate neurons involved in sensing innocuous stimuli, and exploit the resulting inhibition of nociceptive signaling that occurs to reduce pain. Over the past few decades, much research and progress has built upon this theory.

  

**Tangent 2: Colors don’t exist and a trees don’t make sounds when they fall**

“We have no direct immediate access to the world, nor to any of its properties.”

-   Ulric Neisser
    

This section is meant to address the notion that some may have that pain is some sort of physical event that happens at the site of injury, and to have some fun. I think a few examples from other sensory systems are useful here. It may be a bit hard to conceptualize at first but stick with me.

Colors do not exist in our physical surroundings. They are entirely a construct of the brain. What really physically exists in our environment is objects that reflect different wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation. Our visual system is sensitive to a narrow range (the visible light range) of the existing wavelengths, when visual inputs are taken in, the brain that creates our experience of color. Again, this idea can be hard to conceptualize-- it is literally an attempt to separate from human experience-- but its an important thing to understand. As Neisser said, our experience of the objective physical world is through the lens of our sensory systems, which create inherently subjective perceptions. Our experience of the world is like a map; it is just a model/representation. The answer to the age old question posed by George Berkeley “If a tree falls and no one hears it, does it make a sound?” depends entirely on how you define sound, like many riddles and philosophical questions. Again, what really exists is longitudinal waves of air compression. But for our purposes, if you define sound as our experience of noise, of the bang we perceive, then even if someone hears it, the tree doesn’t make the sound: the brain does. The same thing that applies to color applies to all of our perceptions, including pain.

This may seem like a pointless distinction, and for everyday life perhaps it is. But the fact that our perceptions are a subjective model of reality rather than a perfect 1:1 recreation allows for crucial things relevant to the discussion of pain. It makes it possible for them to be malleable and even unreliable.

  

**Tangent 3: An Evolutionary Perspective on Pain Modulation**

It is not always justifiable to use evolution to explain why certain things about humans are the way they are (for example, see [Four Fallacies of Pop Evolutionary Psychology](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/four-fallacies-of-pop-evolutionary-2012-12-07/)). However, when it comes to something as fundamental to our survival as pain, it is certainly reasonable to draw some conclusions, as long as we remain relatively parsimonious.

We know that the general purpose that pain serves for any given organism is to alert the organism to a threat to the integrity of the organism's body. There is no doubt that it is extremely important for self-preservation. But we also know that, at its worst, the experience of pain can be extremely debilitating, and can temporarily destroy an organism's ability to respond to the environment. In certain contexts, if the magnitude of pain was always directly proportional to the amount of damage, this would pose a serious threat to an organism's life. For example, imagine one animal (a distant, distant ancestor of us humans) is trying to escape another, which manages to bite its foot, inflicting pretty severe damage. It is quite obvious that in this context, the ability of the organism's body to modulate the intensity of pain would be extremely conducive to survival; if it just broke down and started howling in pain it would be killed quickly. On the other hand, there are also instances where increased pain sensitivity is useful. Following an injury, it is likely conducive to an organism's survival to reduce strenuous physical exertion, and be more cautious of threats, knowing that it’s body is not prepared to respond effectively. Increased pain sensitivity aids in these functions. Over hundreds of millions of years, it is certain that the ability to modulate pain (both up and down depending on context) was naturally selected for. Organisms who were capable of more precise modulation were more successful reproductively, thus leading subsequent generations to have similar abilities.

While the above explanation seems so logical that it can even stand on its own, empirical evidence is always nice. A series of studies on squid [https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21900465/?dopt=Abstract](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21900465/?dopt=Abstract)  [Squid Have Nociceptors That Display Widespread Long-Term Sensitization and Spontaneous Activity after Bodily Injury](https://www.jneurosci.org/content/33/24/10021)  [Nociceptive Sensitization Reduces Predation Risk: Current Biology](https://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822(14)00335-2) ) is pretty cool. The first major finding is that squid nociceptors sensitize (reduce threshold for activation and activate more strongly to the same stimulus) following injury. The second major finding is that injured “squid respond to minor injury with long-lasting enhancement of defensive responses to visual and tactile stimuli.” Uninjured and injured squid were then either given a strong anesthetic or not, and put into an experimental pond with natural predators. When compared to anesthetized injured squid, untreated injured squid displayed heightened defensiveness and more “carefulness” if you will. Specifically: “sensitization produced changes in antipredator responses that resulted in increased alert distances and flight initiation distances and increased reliance on escalated defensive behaviors such as inking and jetting at earlier stages of encounters'.” After 30 minutes, both groups of uninjured squid had similar, higher rates of survival than the injured squid, unsurprisingly. However, injured squid without the anesthetic survived at a much higher rate than injured squid who’s pain was dampened or removed by the anesthetic. In other words, neutralizing the effects of nociceptor sensitization caused a decrease in survival, due to the decreased defensiveness and carefulness it induced. This is strong evidence for a survival benefit of increased sensitivity of noxious stimulus, and this conclusion can certainly be extrapolated to other species.

Modulation mechanisms, both those that are dependent on psychology/context and those that are not, evolved because they were conducive to survival. However, with the ability to modulate the pain response to a given noxious stimulus comes the potential for dysfunction with disastrous effects, including chronic pain that persists despite a lack of damage.

**Tangent 4: Decussation of Pain/Thermal vs Touch/Proprioception Ascending Pathways**

There are two distinct main ascending pathways for these submodalities of somatosensation. Both pathways decussate (cross over to the other side) in the spinal cord, but the spinothalamic tract decussates at a lower point. Thus, in some spinal cord injuries that injure only one side of the spinal cord, it is possible to lose most if not all of the sense of touch and proprioception in one side of the body below the injury site, yet still feel pain and temperature there, and vice versa. Pretty cool.

  