


  
**Introduction**

In this final article, I aim to show a more detailed look at the neuroanatomy and neurobiology underlying pain. I first outline the ascending pathway again. Throughout, there are some brief explanations of the events that allow neurons to fire action potentials. Next, I explain a couple of particularly interesting modulatory mechanisms.

This article builds off of the material covered in the other two articles. However, this is still only a glimpse; there is so much more information out there. Further reading is provided throughout the article and at the end.

For full understanding, this article assumes some background basic neuroscience knowledge: understanding the whole article will be easier with some knowledge about general neuron structure, and some specific mechanisms in the section of modulatory mechanisms will make more sense if you have some knowledge about membrane potentials. Links to resources for learning about these topics are provided throughout the article.

My main sources for this article are the following textbooks: [Wall & Melzack's Textbook of Pain - 6th Edition](https://www.elsevier.com/books/wall-and-melzacks-textbook-of-pain/mcmahon/978-0-7020-4059-7), [Principles of Neural Science by Eric R. Kandel](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/826396.Principles_of_Neural_Science), [Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain by Mark F. Bear](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/170011.Neuroscience). I will abbreviate them as WMP, Kandel, and Bear ETB, respectively. Page numbers provided are of the most recent editions of each book.

  

**Contents**

More details on the pain pathway

Nociceptors

Dorsal Horn of Spinal Cord

Ascending Tracts

Brain

Pain

More detailed neurobiological modulatory mechanisms

The Periphery

The Dorsal Horn

The Brain

Tangents

General Sensation and Perception

How do we know specific functions of brain regions?

  

See [this YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6qS83wD29PY&vl=en) to get an idea for general neuron structure.

**More Details on the Ascending Pathway
Nociceptors**

Recall that nociceptors are primary sensory neurons that respond to noxious stimuli. The three groups of noxious stimuli are mechanical, thermal, and chemical. Some nociceptors are specialized to one of these, but most respond to all (they are called polymodal). Nociceptors are actually not structured like the neurons outlined in that video. They are actually called [pseudounipolar neurons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudounipolar_neuron), and they lack dendrites. Instead, their axons split into 2 directions from the cell body (which lies in the dorsal root ganglion, right next to the spinal cord). One branch extends into the periphery, and the other, much shorter branch extends into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The end of the axon branch that extends into the periphery is responsible for sensing and transducing stimuli. It is worth noting that we humans have 31 pairs of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) along the lengths of our spinal cords. Each one contains about 10,000-15,000 primary sensory neurons, about 70% of which are nociceptors. Each pair of DRG has neurons that terminate in specific areas in the periphery.

The rest of the neurons that will be discussed in the brain and spinal cord can be thought of as having similar structures to the neuron outlined in the video, but it is worth noting that most are way more complex. Estimates for the total amount of different neurons are up 10,000. ([Neurons, Synapses, Action Potentials, and Neurotransmission](http://www.mind.ilstu.edu/curriculum/neurons_intro/neurons_intro.php))

There are actually two general classes of nociceptors, based on the types of axons they possess. C fibers are thin, unmyelinated fibers, and A delta fibers are thin and myelinated. Conduction velocity increases with increasing diameter and myelination, so A delta fibers conduct faster than C fibers. The conduction velocity for A delta fibers ranges from about 5-30 meters per second, while the conduction velocity for C fibers is less than 1 meter per second (Kandel 531). This explains the interesting phenomenon of 2 distinct feelings of pain from a sudden noxious stimulus; one that is more immediate and sharper, and one that arrives later and more dull. Interestingly, there are thicker, and thus faster, axons that are reserved for other modalities of somatosensation, and for motor outputs. Nociceptors can also be classified by the specific submodalities that they are sensitive to. The three categories are thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli. However, most nociceptors are polymodal, meaning they respond to all 3. There are known receptors and ion channels for transduction (initiation of electrical activity in response to information/stimulus) of these 3 classes of stimuli into action potentials. (Kandel pages 531-534)

Here is a brief description of action potentials occur, which should help you really understand the rest of the article. The electric potential of the inside of a resting neuron is about -70 mV relative to the extracellular space. Thus, there is a voltage of -70 mV across the membrane. In order for a nociceptor (or any other neuron) to fire action potentials, there must be an influx of positively charged (mainly sodium) ions which depolarizes (raises) the membrane potential above what is called the threshold potential, which is typically ~55 mV. After this threshold is met, voltage-gated sodium channels (channels that open in response to changes in voltage) open and lead to a large depolarization to ~30 mV.

Given the necessity of ion movement in this process, receptors on nociceptors that transduce noxious stimuli must somehow be related to ion influx and efflux. Many receptors (for each of the 3 groups of noxious stimuli) are themselves ion channels, and many others directly affect ion channels. Ion channels open in response to specific stimuli, and let specific ions pass through. When ion channels detect their preferred stimuli they open, leading to the influx of whatever ion species they are selective to. For the excitation of nociceptors, these are usually ion channels that allow positive ions (cations) like sodium and calcium to flow into the neuron.

Recall that for individual neurons, the information they convey is encoded in the temporal aspects of firing. The main concern with sensory neurons is the simple frequency of firing. More frequent action potentials indicate higher stimulus intensity. This increased frequency is caused by heightened and prolonged depolarization in the sensory end of the nociceptor. This same trend of frequency encoding intensity seems to persist throughout the whole nervous system, but in many neurons other temporal aspects of firing like precisely timed patterns may be important in precise encoding of information.

  

**Dorsal Horn of Spinal Cord**

Nociceptors, along with other sensory/afferent (carrying incoming information) neurons from peripheral sites below the face (neurons that originate in the head synapse onto a structure in the brainstem called the trigeminal nucleus rather than in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord), have their soma (cell bodies) in a bundle called the dorsal root ganglion, which is near the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. They terminate in the dorsal horn itself, and their terminations are very organized. The dorsal horn is actually organized into 10 sections, called laminae, and each lamina has quite specific incoming neurons. For example, most nociceptors terminate in lamina 1, and some others in laminae 2 and 5. This organization is significant because it keeps specific information grouped together; for example, nociceptor terminations are kept together, and mechanoreceptor endings are kept together elsewhere. Also, within the laminae in which nociceptors terminate, there is somatotopic organization, meaning the nociceptors from specific body regions terminate in an organized fashion; the laminae at each vertical level of the spinal cord can be seen as “maps,” of the body parts that send nociceptors to that level. This helps preserve spatial information, and is conducive to our ability to accurately locate the site of pain. More on this later. (Kandel pages 534-535)

Recall from article 1 that in the dorsal horn, nociceptors synapse onto ascending neurons (also known as second-order sensory neurons). It is worth noting that immediately after this synapse, the ascending neuron decussates (crosses over) to the other side of the spinal cord. (It is important to note that these ascending/projection neurons are completely different from the interneurons, which will be discussed soon, that also reside in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord). This sort of crossing over is very common in the nervous system, but it is unclear why. Recall that the pathway for other somatosensory modalities like touch cross over at a higher point in the spinal cord from a tangent in article 1.

The fundamental excitation requirement for the ascending neurons is the same as essentially all neurons: depolarization above the threshold potential, which is about -55 mV. However, the events leading to this are different than those for nociceptors because unlike nociceptors, ascending neurons are excited by a presynaptic neuron rather than direct sensory stimuli. The way that this happens is when an action potential reaches the end of the presynaptic neuron (nociceptor in this case) it releases vesicles (essentially small packets) of neurotransmitters. The primary neurotransmitter for all sensory neurons is a small molecule called glutamate. Ascending neurons have 2 major classes of glutamate receptors (AMPA and NMDA) which both gate positively charged ions, especially sodium. Thus, when they bind to glutamate released by nociceptors, they help depolarize (raise) the membrane potential. There is something special about NMDA receptors which will be discussed later.

However, the events at the dorsal horn are not as simple as nociceptor releases neurotransmitter→ ascending neuron is activated. Yes, we know from the last 2 articles that there is the potential for modulatory mechanisms to act, but even when ignoring those there is more nuance. Most ascending neurons have synapses with many nociceptors. One nociceptor releasing neurotransmitter vesicles due to one action potential will seldom activate an ascending neuron; this would not cause sufficient membrane depolarization. More ion channels must open. There are two major ways that more ion channels are opened so that adequate depolarization is achieved: temporal summation and spatial summation. Temporal summation is the result of single presynaptic neurons (nociceptors in this case) firing many action potentials in quick succession. This leads to a greater release of neurotransmitters, which increases depolarization because more ion channels are opened. Each time a load of glutamate is released, a small depolarization occurs. When action potentials fire frequently, before the membrane can repolarize, another load of neurotransmitters brings it back up. In a series of “[steps](https://www.google.com/search?q=temporal+summation+voltmeter+graph&tbm=isch&ved=2ahUKEwjE5_Kn9fTqAhUGVt8KHen0BD4Q2-cCegQIABAA&oq=temporal+summation+voltmeter+graph&gs_lcp=CgNpbWcQA1CjqgJYjLACYO-xAmgAcAB4AIABPYgBzQKSAQE2mAEAoAEBqgELZ3dzLXdpei1pbWfAAQE&sclient=img&ei=6bQiX4TPEYas_Qbp6ZPwAw&bih=704&biw=1194&client=safari#imgrc=H7fN6wnxe4yhIM)'' the postsynaptic neuron can be brought to adequate depolarization. In spatial summation, multiple nociceptors fire simultaneously, which produces sufficient neurotransmitter release for adequate depolarization. In real organisms, both of these types of summation are constantly happening; it is unlikely that without precise lab techniques, a single nociceptor could be activated to fire a single action potential. Here is a video on the topic: [019 What is Summation (2 Types)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pd0IQ-Nx8dM). (Bear ETB pages 133-134)

To add more nuance, glutamate is actually not the only neurotransmitter that nociceptors can release. They can also release a much larger molecule called substance P, which belongs to a class of molecules called neuropeptides. Unlike small neurotransmitters like glutamate (which fall into clases called amino acid neurotransmitters and amine neurotransmitters), most neuropeptides like substance P are not released as a result of every action potential. Instead, there must be temporal summation in a single nociceptor for substance P to be released. Long story short, for neurotransmitter release to occur, there must be an influx of calcium ions in the presynaptic neuron, which occurs as a result of the action potential reaching the presynaptic terminal. Large neuropeptides like substance P release requires more calcium to build up in the presynaptic neuron terminal than glutamate does. (Bear ETB page 124). Temporal summation in a single nociceptor contributes to the release of substance P. When it is released, it is thought to help prolong the depolarization caused by glutamate. (Kandel page 536)

The vast majority of the neurons in the dorsal horn are actually interneurons (WMP page 78), whose entire bodies stay local in the spinal cord and act to modulate signaling and processing. Many of these interneurons secrete endogenous opioids, and thus aid in the inhibition of pain in certain cases. The dorsal horn is also the site of modulation by descending neurons from the brain, which can also release endogenous opioids and other relevant molecules like the neurotransmitter GABA into the spinal cord. Much like excitation, inhibition of neurons by these molecules involves ion channels. They prevent adequate depolarization and may cause slight hyperpolarizations, by triggering an influx of negatively charged ions, especially chloride. Neurons in the central nervous system (spinal cord and brain) frequently receive excitatory and inhibitory inputs simultaneously. It is a matter of the relative strengths of these inputs that determines whether or not action potentials will be fired. This will be discussed in more depth later.

  

**Ascending Tracts**

I mentioned the spinothalamic tract in the previous 2 articles, which is the most prominent ascending tract for pain in humans and more complex mammals. It’s name is due to the fact that its neurons originate in the spinal cord and terminate in a brain structure called the thalamus. It is one of multiple pathways involved in pain, and is actually, evolutionarily, the newest one; there are 4 more which are involved in pain processing, which are not as directly involved in cognition. They are the spinoreticular, spinomesencephalic, cervicothalamic, and spinohypothalamic pathways. Roles of the tracts overlap, but some of them seem to have distinct roles and termination sites in the brain.

The spinoreticular tract sends axons and information to the reticular formation, a brain region that is best known for its role in arousal. Thus, this pathway may be responsible for the heightened arousal that often accompanies pain. The spinomesencephalic tract seems to carry information involved in the emotional and affective component of a pain experience. It may also be involved in stimulating activity in descending modulatory pathways. The spinohypothalamic tract sends signals to areas of the hypothalamus, which are involved in autonomic processes all throughout the body. (Kandel pages 541-544)

It is worth noting that higher sections of the tracts contain more neurons. This is because ascending neurons originating at higher segments of the spinal cord join the tract. Also, spatial organization of neurons from the spinal cord is preserved in the spinothalamic tract. Neurons that join higher up push the neurons already in the tract (those that originate lower in the spinal cord) out laterally. Thus, information coming from lower in the body is held in neurons on the lateral edges of the spinothalamic tract. (WMP page 184) Also, neurons from each vertical segment of the spinal cord are also presumably at least crudely somatotopically organized, as terminations in multiple early brain regions maintain somatotopic organization.

  

**The Brain**

It might be helpful to read the first tangent before the next section.

Nociceptive information flows from nociceptors to the spinal cord, up the spinothalamic tract to the thalamus (a sort of “relay station” in the brain), and then to the primary somatosensory cortex (S1). (The minor spinoreticular tract travels to the reticular formation first). Multiple parallel pathways diverge from S1, more complex information is represented and emphasized by neurons in later brain regions of these pathways, and information transitions from being purely sensory to being very cognitive. It is hard to notice this due to how seamless our perception of pain is, but there are actually subcomponents of the pain experience, including the localization of it and the negative emotional response to it. Different brain regions are responsible for these different components. There are many brain regions that are typically active during a pain experience, and some general ideas about their specific functions exist. In roughly the order of normal information flow, here are some the brain regions that seem to be most important in pain processing: reticular formation, thalamus, S1 (primary somatosensory cortex), S2 (secondary somatosensory cortex), insular cortex (IC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), prefrontal cortex (PFC).

I will not go too deep into the functional specialization of brain regions here because most of the information that you might want about it can be found here: [THE BRAIN FROM TOP TO BOTTOM](http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/i/i_03/i_03_cr/i_03_cr_dou/i_03_cr_dou.html) (look at all 3 levels of explanation). It includes commentary on specific topics not discussed here such as learning and anticipating pain and pain empathy. Some evidence for the roles of specific regions is presented here, but see the tangent for a more focused commentary on how brain region functions are found.

The reticular formation is best known for its involvement in arousal and alertness, and is the termination site of the spinoreticular tract. When damage is inflicted upon the formation, it often results in a coma or vegatative state. ([Central Nervous System - Reticular Formation](https://psych.athabascau.ca/html/Psych289/Biotutorials/7/formation.shtml)) It is thought to contribute to the heightened arousal and agitation that is frequently associated with pain. Early cortical regions such as the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices (S1 and S2, respectively) seem to be primarily concerned with the sensory qualities of pain, like where it is and the purely physical sensation. Strong evidence for this comes from the effects of lesions to these areas: “A patient who suffered a stroke involving S1 and S2 could not localize or describe the nature of a painful stimulus but instead reported a poorly localized and ill- defined unpleasant feeling when presented with a noxious stimulus.” (WMP Page 114) These areas are also destinations of touch sensations, and probably aid in processing the overall physical feeling of a painful stimulus. These areas also both have “somatosensory maps.” Different parts of these maps receive inputs from the body. [Here is an image of it.](https://www.google.com/search?q=somatosensory+homunculus&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk00yvICJpWgBKQfRytIA_zOqCxoCYA:1594339916991&tbm=isch&source=iu&ictx=1&fir=GX6J0Rx2oQcs3M%252C7eOsT0nLBJ8N-M%252C_&vet=1&usg=AI4_-kTI9V2oo02tHccWY56uaut6r5QRWA&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjQxZyDs8HqAhXYlnIEHaFJA2MQ9QEwAnoECAgQKw&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=b4roa5vC_uDjwM) A popular, disturbing image in neuroscience is that of the [somatosensory homunculus](https://www.google.com/search?q=somatosensory+homunculus&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk00yvICJpWgBKQfRytIA_zOqCxoCYA:1594339916991&tbm=isch&source=iu&ictx=1&fir=GX6J0Rx2oQcs3M%252C7eOsT0nLBJ8N-M%252C_&vet=1&usg=AI4_-kTI9V2oo02tHccWY56uaut6r5QRWA&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjQxZyDs8HqAhXYlnIEHaFJA2MQ9QEwAnoECAgQKw&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=GX6J0Rx2oQcs3M), a depiction of a man whose body parts are in proportion to their representation in this map. The organization of this map aids in localization of a sensory stimulus. Later brain regions like the ACC and IC are thought to be more involved with processing the affective and emotional components of pain. Lesions to these areas often cause a condition called pain asymbolia, in which patients seem to feel pain normally, yet do not seem like they care at all; they have no emotional response to it (WMP page 114). The prefrontal cortex is involved with some of the highest-order cognitive tasks. For pain specifically, it may be involved in anticipating and paying attention to pain, and to form long term associations between stimuli and pain. The ACC and PFC also send feedback axons to the PAG-RVM. This pathway is likely involved in allowing emotional and cognitive influences to influence pain.

  

**Membrane Potentials**

While it is not always useful to think so reductionistically, it is not untrue to say that all of the known mechanisms of pain modulation boil down to action potentials. (Indeed, you could certainly argue that our entire existence as conscious beings boils down to action potentials, but that’s a discussion for another day.) These mechanisms all either increase or decrease in likelihood of firing of action potentials at a higher or lower frequency in neurons contributing to pain. And action potentials boil down to ion movements through ion channels in neuron membranes. So to truly understand what’s going on, it is helpful to have some intuition about how the membrane resting potential is maintained, and the molecular mechanisms behind both graded potentials and action potentials. If you need a refresher, see [Neuron action potentials: The creation of a brain signal (article)](https://www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/mcat/organ-systems/neuron-membrane-potentials/a/neuron-action-potentials-the-creation-of-a-brain-signal) and/or [An intuitive approach to understanding the resting membrane potential](https://journals.physiology.org/doi/pdf/10.1152/advan.00049.2016). The second paper is more advanced but also much better.

If you can narrate the molecular events (which channels open when, and which ions move in and out) responsible for this graph ([action potential](https://www.google.com/search?q=action+potential&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk02uIiaWeYG47bppk0vTElDhRqiVFA:1590888480440&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwifw4O2-dzpAhUKmHIEHXVPCLAQ_AUoAnoECBEQBA&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=8vAYyPJekTyIWM)), and you understand how changing ion concentrations inside and outside of the cell alter the resting potential, you should be good to go. If you don’t yet understand this, play around by plugging stuff into the GHK equation and read the second paper I linked, or just trust me and continue reading.

  

Some things that may help understanding of membrane potentials:

-Equilibrium for an ion occurs when the tendency to move one way due to diffusion is balanced by the tendency to move the other way due to electrical forces

-Large changes in potential are generated by tiny changes in concentration

-The relevant ions that actually move across the membrane are not the only things that contribute to membrane potential; there are many large negatively charged molecules in the cell that don’t move across the membrane.

  

**Neurobiology of Pain Modulation**

As we know, modulatory mechanisms for pain are essentially an extremely broad group of mechanisms that can change how the nervous system responds to a noxious stimulus. This section essentially explains some of the particularly interesting neurobiological mechanisms behind the ability of the nervous system to induce different pain intensities for a given noxious stimulus. As a general rule, modulation occurs at endings of neurons, namely synapses (for most neurons), or receptor endings for primary sensory neurons. Modulation while an action potential in traveling down an axon is possible, but most likely not too prevalent and will not be discussed here. Recall the 3 main relevant locations of modulation laid out in part 1: the periphery, the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, and the brain itself. At each of these sites, we will examine in a good amount of depth how neurons in the pathway of pain become more or less likely to fire action potentials, via numerous mechanisms. To generate an action potential, a neuronal membrane must depolarize from its resting potential to its threshold of about -55 mV, mainly by way of positively charged ions (sodium and calcium) flowing in. Also, the higher the depolarizing current, the higher the frequency of ensuing action potentials. There will be commentary about how these mechanisms may change in chronic pain. Keep in mind that there are many more mechanisms that the ones discussed here.

  

**-The Periphery
Key Event: Firing of Action Potentials by Nociceptor**

Local inflammation is a crucial event that can cause increased sensitivity of nociceptors. In the response, many cells, immune and non-immune, secrete chemicals locally and initiate increased blood flow and Many chemicals are released locally that can either 1. Directly contribute to activation of nociceptors by opening sodium channels 2. Sensitize nociceptors by causing changes to their membranes and associated proteins 3. Cause release of other chemicals that do 1 or 2. A variety of both ligand gated ion channels (ionotropic receptors) and G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs/Metabotropic receptors) play a role in the nociceptors' engagement with these chemicals.

Among the chemicals that can directly activate nociceptors are ATP, protons, serotonin. The way they work is by opening specific ion channels; P2X channels are selective for ATP (WMP page 6), and acid-sensing ion channels (ASIC) are selective for protons (WMP page 16). Arachidonic acid metabolites, including prostaglandins, sensitize nociceptors by decreasing the threshold potential of voltage gated sodium channels (Na 1.8 specifically.) Sodium channels are molecularly structured such that they are closed under normal cellular conditions, and that depolarizations to around -55 mv cause them to open. These chemicals must somehow reduce the amount of depolarization necessary to cause them to open. Sodium ion influx through voltage gated channels is a major step responsible for action potentials, so this sensitization is sure to aid in nociception. But keep in mind that noxious stimuli themselves do not activate voltage gated channels. Depolarization to a threshold is necessary. The initial depolarization from -70 to -55 is mediated by other ion channels that are selective for thermal, chemical, or mechanical noxious stimuli. These include the aforementioned channels for protons and ATP and TRP channels that are mainly temperature gated (WMP page 40). It is very interesting to note that high-threshold channels selective for mechanical stimuli have not been discovered.

NSAIDs like ibuprofen and naproxen (advil and aleve) inhibit the enzymes (Cox) that catalyze prostaglandin synthesis ([How Do Pain Relievers Work? - George Zaidan](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9mcuIc5O-DE)). In addition to sensitizing nociceptors, prostaglandins play a role in causing the inflammatory response, which is why NSAIDs are anti-inflammatory.

There is also good evidence that changes to gene expression is involved in sensitization of nociceptors. After inflammation, the amount of neurons expressing important receptors (TRPV1, specifically) increases by 100%, due to expression of the gene and transport to the sensory endings (the cell bodies/soma, where proteins like receptors are made, of nociceptors lie in the dorsal root ganglia, which are right next to the spinal cord. Possibly many feet from the nerve endings). This indicates that some non-nociceptive neurons have become nociceptive.This is presumably accompanied by remapping in the spinal cord such that ascending neurons associated with nociception form synapses with these neurons. This would allow normally innocuous stimuli to become painful. Also, individual nociceptors can enhance the quantity of receptors on their membrane surfaces to become more excitable; with more receptors that can induce depolarization upon activation, it takes less to prompt a nociceptor to fire action potentials. (WMP Chapters 1 and 3) [THE BRAIN FROM TOP TO BOTTOM](https://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/a/a_03/a_03_m/a_03_m_dou/a_03_m_dou.html)

In ordinary states, there are many “silent” nociceptors which do not respond to any except the most intense noxious stimuli. Following an injury, these may reduce their threshold for activation, adding a whole new set of nociceptive inputs to the ascending pathway.

  

**-The Dorsal Horn of the Spinal Cord
Key Event: Firing of Action Potentials by Ascending Spinal Cord Neuron**

The dorsal horn is a very eventful site, at which many mechanisms for modulation exist. The mechanisms of modulation can be grouped into 3 classes based on how they work: 1. Altering amount of neurotransmitter released by the nociceptor 2. Altering the response of the ascending neuron to a given amount of neurotransmitter 3. Directly activating ascending neurons

Many chemicals which can modulate pain may be released into the dorsal horn, by a variety of cells, for a variety of reasons such as inflammation and descending inputs from the brain. Some are excitatory, and others are inhibitory. They can be read about in more detail here: [The Transition of Acute Postoperative Pain to Chronic Pain: An Integrative Overview of Research on Mechanisms](https://www.jpain.org/article/S1526-5900(16)30329-7/pdf) and in WMP Chapter 6. Descending inputs from the brain will be discussed in the next section.

NMDA Mediated LTP: Long term potentiation (LTP) can be defined as a long term strengthening of a synapse (the synapse becomes more reliable, postsynaptic neuron more excitable) following frequent stimulation. There are potentially many mechanisms for this, but the most frequently talked about one goes as follows. Glutamate is the excitatory neurotransmitter used by all sensory neurons, including nociceptors. There are two main types of glutamate receptors on postsynaptic neurons (ascending pain neurons in this case) in the spinal cord: AMPA and NMDA. AMPA receptors are ligand gated ion channels that are primarily permeable to sodium. NMDA receptors are both ligand and voltage gated channels that are permeable to all cations, including calcium. When glutamate is released at the synapse, it binds to both AMPA and NMDA receptors, but AMPA receptors open first, which leads to a depolarization. Only after this depolarization occurs for a sufficient amount of time can NMDA receptors open, because they are normally blocked by a magnesium ion, which only pops out when the membrane is depolarized. This is its mechanism of voltage gating. When NMDA receptors are frequently opened, a good amount of calcium can enter the cell. Calcium is a well known player in many signal transduction pathways, and can cause many intracellular changes. In this case, it can increase the expression of AMPA receptors at the synapse, which increases sensitivity and strength of the synapse in the long term, which is potentially involved in chronic pain. Note that LTP is also thought to be important in learning and memory. Here is a nice video on it: [2-Minute Neuroscience: Long-Term Potentiation (LTP)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-mHgPfXHzJE). Other mechanisms of LTP likely exist, besides specifically increasing expression of AMPA receptors, but all are likely dependent on NMDA receptor opening and calcium ion influx.

Chloride Mediated Shunting Inhibition: Many receptors for GABA, the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, are chloride channels. Normally, the Nernst potential for chloride is just about the same as the resting membrane potential. Thus, if you open chloride channels, there would only be a miniscule change in the membrane potential. However, if chloride channels are opened simultaneously with sodium channels, they will inhibit the depolarizing effect of sodium. This is because as soon as sodium begins to diffuse into the cell, the membrane potential increases, which causes negatively charged chloride to also enter the cell, preventing depolarization. This is called shunting inhibition, and GABA is involved in its use. It is an inhibitory mechanism in the dorsal horn.

Disruptions in Chloride Concentration: What is really interesting is when events happen to mess this normally inhibitory mechanism up. There is a protein called KCC2 (WMP page 102) which continuously pumps chloride ions out of the cell, maintaining the proper concentration gradient. However, some chemicals including BDNF, which can be released into the spinal cord, inhibit the activity of KCC2. Thus, intracellular chloride concentration will rise, and the Nernst potential of chloride will also rise (plug some numbers into the Nernst equation for a -1 ion). The Nernst potential for an ion essentially tells us what the membrane potential would be if it were only permeable to that ion. Thus, when permeability to that ion increases (by channels for it opening), the membrane potential will rush in the direction of the Nernst potential of that ion. If the change in concentration of chloride is drastic enough, it may reach a point where opening chloride channels would actually strongly depolarize the membrane. Thus, normally inhibitory mechanisms would actually be excitatory. This is obviously very interesting, but there is a lack of direct evidence for its occurrence or significance.

Mechanisms for Secondary Hyperalgesia: There also exist many mechanisms for secondary hyperalgesia, which is increased pain sensitivity not in the site of injury. There is much evidence that while primary hyperalgesia is largely mediated by peripheral mechanisms, secondary hyperalgesia is mediated by central ones (WMP page 12). Numerous potential mechanisms for this exist in the dorsal horn. For example, some molecules that are released in the spinal cord to facilitate pain-related signaling may not be localized; they may sensitize ascending neurons that are not specific to the injured region.

Microglia in Neuropathic Pain: In a very specific type of pain called neuropathic pain, in which pain is attributable to damage to or disease of the nervous system, multiple lines of evidence support the idea that a specific type of non-neuronal nervous system cell called microglia are very important in the development of hyperalgesia. These cells proliferate in the dorsal horn following nerve injury. Numerous aspects of their activity contribute to hyperalgesia, including the release of BDNF, which increases the excitability of spinal cord neurons. It may also aid in the disruption of normal inhibitory mechanisms (WMP chapter 4).

It is worth noting that all types of glia are an area of active neuroscience research. There are actually more glia than neurons in the nervous system. There is much emerging evidence that they play a larger role than they were once thought to; their name actually means “glue” in Greek, due to the fact that early neuroscientists thought they were essentially simply meant for holding neurons together. However, commentary on the specific newly discovered roles of glia are beyond the scope of these articles.

  

**-The Brain
Key Event: Complex Pattern of Firing Across Different Areas of Brain That are Involved in Pain**

The two main topics of discussion in this section will be how the brain sends descending modulatory inputs to the spinal cord and how the brain might change its own processing of pain related information.

PAG-RVM Descending Pathway: This pathway has been discussed numerous times in the preceding articles. Here, I will go into more detail about regions of the brain that contribute to it. The brain regions from which this pathway stems are the periaqueductal grey (PAG) and the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM). The pathway can send information down to the spinal cord, where they can modulate pain signaling. Numerous chemicals released in these brain regions can affect its functioning, including opioids which promote inhibitory modulation, and CCK which promotes excitatory modulation, among many others (WMP Page 133). This system seems to release endogenous opioids, serotonin, or noradrenaline/norepinephrine into the spinal cord. Interestingly, serotonin seems to be involved both in amplifying and dampening signaling. It is unclear why/how this ability of serotonin in the system evolved, but it is mediated by different cell and receptor types. In the spinal cord, released chemicals act by one of the 3 general ways described in the beginning of the last section.

Among the regions of the brain that send inputs to the PAG-RVM system are areas involved in cognition and emotion such as the prefrontal cortex and areas of the amygdala. ([The Transition of Acute Postoperative Pain to Chronic Pain: An Integrative Overview of Research on Mechanisms](https://www.jpain.org/article/S1526-5900(16)30329-7/pdf) and WMP chapter 8). These connections probably allow pain to be modulated by cognitive and emotional states, and likely at least partially mediate nocebo and placebo effects on pain, as discussed in article 1.

Neuroplasticity in the brain is likely the most interesting modulatory mechanism for pain. Neuroplasticity in the brain can vaguely be defined as changes to the brain. This usually involves formation or alteration of synapses, LTP and LTD, and even growth of new neurons (this used to be thought to be impossible in adults. But even though we now think it's possible, it is still very limited). All sorts of changes to brain regions involved in pain could very likely play a large role in the modulation of pain. I haven’t seen too much evidence for its significance in pain, but that seems to be because there hasn’t been much direct research on it. However, there is no reason to doubt that the brain undergoes changes significant to chronic pain given evidence for neuroplasticity involved in other things, and there are some interesting observations worth discussing. First, when people with chronic pain are subjected to the same experimental noxious stimulus as healthy people, there is heightened activity in brain regions involved in pain. (WMP page 122) This indicates that pain processing is amplified, but this may very well be due to modulatory factors acting before the brain. More research is needed to tease out the reasons behind this observation. Additionally, there are often changes to the sizes of certain brain regions involved in pain in chronic pain patients. At this time it is unclear what their significance is, but it seems highly likely that they are important.

A particularly fascinating, but extremely speculative, mechanism that one can conceive is pain related brain regions forming strong synapses with other brain regions. If this happened, activation in the other brain regions could activate pain related regions, and potentially induce pain without nociception. See tangent 2 in article 2 for a further discussion on this.

It is worth noting that many of the long term changes in the nervous system that have been discussed are at least partially mediated by epigenetic changes in relevant cells. These are, in short, long term changes to the way that a cell expresses its genes. This changes the ways cells behave without actually changing the genetic information they hold (regulation is altered, not DNA sequences).

This concludes this series of articles. If you made it this far, I hope you have learned a lot and enjoyed the process.

  
  

Here are some good places to visit if you’re interested in learning more about the underlying neurobiology of pain: [Wall & Melzack's Textbook of Pain - 6th Edition](https://www.elsevier.com/books/wall-and-melzacks-textbook-of-pain/mcmahon/978-0-7020-4059-7)

[The Transition of Acute Postoperative Pain to Chronic Pain: An Integrative Overview of Research on Mechanisms](https://www.jpain.org/article/S1526-5900(16)30329-7/pdf)

[http://thebrain.mcgill.ca](http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/)

  

**Tangents**
  
**Tangent 1: General Sensation and Perception**

Here, I will give a brief, incomplete outline of how sensory information generally progresses throughout the brain. I mainly use examples from the visual system because it better exemplifies some of the points. Keep in mind that this is only a glimpse of the complexity of the brain. More details about topics such as layers of cortical regions and small neural circuits can be found in neuroscience textbooks (like Kandel chapters 16-18 and 21), and there is still so much for humanity to learn about the brain. If you only want details on pain specifically, return to the main body of this article, but I think most people will find this discussion interesting. Also, see tangent 2 for information on how functions of specific brain regions are found.

Information in the nervous system as a whole is essentially encoded in which neurons are firing and temporal aspects of their firing such as frequency and more intricate firing patterns. Seeing doesn’t work like [this](https://www.google.com/search?q=cartesian+theatre&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk02PjF-5ph7h_8RpKowSl-zXmck25A:1596375098676&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiO77zV0PzqAhWjiOAKHVudADQQ_AUoAXoECBMQAw&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=VYlgCkPhjP_7nM)-- that description is a fallacy which just moves the question of how seeing works to another agent. Instead, information from the visual field (in the form of countless photons of different wavelengths reflecting off objects) is transduced into electrical activity in sensory neurons, which represents aspects of the visual field. The same thing goes for all other senses. However, long story short, information encoded by sensory neurons is very raw and unrefined, and must be processed heavily into meaningful perceptions. As Richard Gregory said in his book Eye and Brain, “from the patterns of stimulation on the retina we perceive the world of objects and this is nothing short of a miracle.” Making sense of raw information from sensory neurons is a major job of the brain, and different brain regions can be involved in quite distinct perceptual functions. Neurons in brain regions that sensory information travels to later are capable of encoding more complex and meaningful information, due to computations that refine the information at each set of synapses on the way to later regions. Computations and information processing can be thought of as postsynaptic neurons essentially integrating all of the synaptic inputs (thousands of them, maybe even up to 200,000 [Scale of the Human Brain – AI Impacts](https://aiimpacts.org/scale-of-the-human-brain/)) they receive and using them to “decide” whether or not to fire action potentials, and at what rate to fire them. This “decision” is made by the net ion influx and outflux into the neuron, and the resulting change to membrane potential. Ultimately, the threshold depolarization must be reached. After this occurs, a new set of neurons are firing, and these postsynaptic neurons encode information that has been altered/refined. Through various steps of these computations as information progresses through the brain, raw sensory information can be turned into meaningful perception. Essentially, “sensory information is processed serially, with each area in the chain carrying out certain computations and conveying the results to the next area” (Kandel 396) and each subsequent brain region processes more complex information. This should start to become more clear in the following paragraphs.

For all the sensory systems except olfaction (the sense of smell), a crucial, early brain region is the thalamus. The thalamus has distinct sections, called nuclei, which receive information from specific senses. It is the termination site for the spinothalamic tract. It is often described as a simple “relay station,” but this is misleading. We know that active information processing/computing occurs in it, which essentially means that the outputted information from the thalamus is not identical to the inputted information. The thalamus sends neurons to regions of the cerebral cortex, the thin sheet of neurons that is folded all over the brain, giving it the characteristic wrinkles. The cortex is evolutionarily the newest part of the brain, and it is responsible for higher-order functions of the brain like cognition and complex sensation and perception. Neuroscientist Korbinian Broddman divided the cortex into [52 distinct regions](https://www.google.com/search?q=brodmann+cortical+areas&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk00sAmL1lKfhXxFtO-NwOCweItBMBw:1596113232274&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjZjeyRgfXqAhXsknIEHcZHANYQ_AUoAXoECAsQAw&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=ci5BUMCsY2-RvM) according to the cellular structure of regions. However, neuroscientists now think that there are significantly more functionally distinct regions. (Kandel page 348).

Each sensory system has a cortical area called the primary area for that sense. This is typically the main site that the thalamus sends neurons to. This primary area is generally topographically organized, meaning that its neurons create a sort of “neural map” of the receptive surface; information originating from adjacent sections on the receptive surface is passed onto neurons that are adjacent in the primary cortical area. This holds true even for a sense like hearing where topographic organization doesn’t make as much sense. (The specifics of this are beyond the scope of this article but can be read about in hearing/audition chapters in neuroscience textbooks or, briefly, [here.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topographic_map_(neuroanatomy)#Auditory_system)) The primary areas typically process fairly basic information about the sensory stimulus at hand. For example, neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) encode information about how specific small edges in the visual field are oriented directionally. (Bear ETB pages 348-349) The primary somatosensory (S1) cortex, which receives information related to pain, thermal sensation, touch, and proprioception, can be seen [here](https://www.google.com/search?q=s1+cortex&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk00nHC92VVDVcWxxiYCq8ybV9ruOwg:1596113652896&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiA47TagvXqAhV1mXIEHSlfCnsQ_AUoAXoECAsQAw&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=UGDEH5PXa_ptUM) and will be discussed more later.

From the primary sensory areas, information travels to other cortical areas that begin to get involved in higher-order functions, including object recognition and using sensory information to guide complex action. Imagine the following scenario to get a better idea for how raw sensory information starts to become more meaningful. There are 3 kids, who are responsible for creating a meaningful image together. Each has a very specific role. The first kid receives a black piece of paper and cuts out a bunch of lines of different lengths and widths and gives these lines to the next kid. The second kid tapes these lines into shapes (triangles, squares, rectangles) and passes them on. The third and final kid orients these shapes on a white paper such that an image that makes sense is created. It is easy to conceive a cartoonish house or something like that being made from this process. You can think of each kid as a brain region processing the information given to it and passing it on-- and your brain might actually do something analogous to what these 3 kids are doing when constructing a visual perception while you look at something. However, it also obviously performs massively more complex computations. It is also important to note that later brain regions may receive and integrate information from numerous senses. These are often called association areas, and they are heavily involved with high order cognition.

There is often divergence into what are called parallel pathways from the primary sensory areas. Each pathway is generally involved in processing different types of information, and progresses in the same manner as outlined in the last paragraph. They each essentially take the same information outputted from the root of divergence and refine and focus on specific aspects of it. For example, from the primary visual cortex, information diverges into [dorsal and ventral pathways](https://www.google.com/search?q=dorsal+and+ventral+visual+pathways&client=safari&rls=en&sxsrf=ALeKk02A0Lsgqehbr2SxW3d5BSt7mIu7Eg:1596114090175&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjfm_aqhPXqAhVUkHIEHYgkCdYQ_AUoAXoECA4QAw&biw=1194&bih=704#imgrc=PkHLwufu5nn1FM). Among other processes, the ventral pathway is heavily involved with processing the aspects of visual objects like form and color and with object recognition, whereas the dorsal pathway seems to be involved with visual guidance of motor behaviors, spatial awareness and motion detection. (Kandel pages 396-402 and Bear ETB pages 356-362). People whose temporal lobes (location to which the ventral pathway travels) are damaged often suffer from visual agnosias, where they cannot recognize objects even though they can draw them perfectly well (the ability to draw them indicates that they can see the object perfectly well). People with damage to regions related to the dorsal pathway often lose the ability to physically engage with objects due to lack of proper visual feedback. For example, when reaching for an object they may fail to make the correct hand shape for the object, or miss the object entirely. Each stream has many more distinct functions. These examples are just to illustrate that after divergence into parallel pathways, each pathway has unique, specific functions.

Finally, it is worth noting that the movement of sensory information in the brain is not always “forward,” or from lower order areas to higher order areas. There are numerous feedback pathways in many systems. For example, the primary visual cortex actually sends more neurons to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) in the thalamus than the LGN sends to the primary visual cortex (Kandel 363). The exact functions of these feedback pathways is unclear. However, it is logical to think that they are involved in top down modulation of sensation and perception, and probably allow cognitive influences to alter what we perceive. Feedback pathways are quite interesting for pain, as we will see.

  
  

**Tangent 2: How do we know the functions of specific brain regions?**

It is quite hard to arrive at extremely specific conclusions about the functions of specific brain regions because of how massively complex and interconnected the brain is. However, we can certainly point out many specializations. Here I will briefly discuss 4 major methods that are used to make inferences about the functions of specific brain regions. All methods have their benefits, but also have important shortcomings that prevent us from being too sure or specific with assignments of functions to regions and from making confident causal inferences. Keep in mind that the following discussion about up and downsides of methods is far from comprehensive.

These are the 4 main methods by which the functions of brain regions are studied:

1.  Observing what behaviors or cognitive processes activity in a brain region correlates with
    
2.  Observing what stimuli correlates with activity in individual neurons in a brain region
    
3.  Observing deficits that result from damage to specific areas
    
4.  Observing what happens when specific regions are directly stimulated
    

  

The first technique typically involves tools like an fMRI or a PET scanner which allow researchers to see blood flow and metabolic activity, respectively, in regions of the brain. Both of these metrics correlate with activity. Subjects are typically put into one of these imaging tools and prompted to perform cognitive tasks such as remembering a word. The brain regions that increase in activity during these tasks are presumably the ones responsible for it. Also, the brain regions that show different activation levels in similar but distinct tasks are presumably responsible for the differences in these cognitive tasks or behaviors. There are a few major shortcomings of this approach. First, this approach is better for finding what regions are involved in a specific activity than the roles of the regions involved. It only targets one specific function. Brain regions typically are involved in many functions, and there is no way to know what they are from this approach alone. Second, the tasks that a subject can be prompted to do while their brain is being imaged is quite limited, which restricts this approach to only testing possible tasks. Third, there are questions about how specific you can make inferences based on this approach. When you observe activity in the brain in a calm resting state versus a decision making state, many brain regions may show different activity. But it would be wrong to conclude that all the differences are responsible for decision making itself. Who's to say that some of these are not a result of factors other than decision making, such as general stress and arousal? This shortcoming can partially be targeted by seeing the difference in brain activity during two similar tasks that differ only in a key component, but it can often persist nonetheless.

Second, you can study the correlation between different stimuli and specific neurons firing. This approach is similar to the first one, but the recording of activity is on a much smaller scale, and it is better suited for studying perception than cognitive tasks like memory. For example, you may record the activity of specific neurons in the primary visual cortex and see that one might only fire when a small edge in the visual field at a certain location is tilted 30 degrees clockwise with respect to a vertical edge. And that a nearby neuron only fires when an edge in a certain location on the visual field is titled 30 degrees counterclockwise. This might help you infer that neurons in the primary visual cortex aid in determining the orientation of specific edges across the visual field. Similarly, you might travel to later visual areas like the fusiform gyrus and see that neurons there primarily fire when you are looking at a human face. This might lead you to conclude that this area is involved with face recognition. The main shortcoming of this issue is how focused it is. In any given brain region, there are millions of neurons. It might be a rash conclusion to generalize the properties found in a handful of these neurons. This approach is better for finding the specific functions of neurons. Also, neurons may be receptive to multiple things, and this approach may neglect those simply because it can’t possibly test every possible stimulus. It’s worth noting that this approach makes much more sense for a sense that must capture intricate details like vision, than for something like pain.

The third technique, the lesion-deficit approach, is by far the oldest. It can be used either by directly inflicting damage upon brain regions, or observing those who have already sustained damage from other causes. The first is called experimental ablation, and was used in the early 1800s in a variety of animals like birds to find out that the cerebrum plays a role in sensation and perception (Bear ETB page 10). The latter approach is more often used in humans, and was used to discover Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, two brain regions involved in language. The logic of this method is that if a specific behavior or cognitive task is impaired when a brain region is damaged, that brain region plays a role in that behavior. It is decent for showing the causal necessity of a region for a function, but not necessarily sufficiency. This is an important distinction. Basically, you can conclude that the damaged brain region is involved in the behavior you're interested in, but you can’t really see how direct the involvement is. For example, if you cut both optic nerves (the nerves from the retina that carry all visual information) the victim will be completely blind. He will obviously be unable to recognize faces. Thus, we can say that the optic nerve is necessary for visual facial recognition. But it turns out that it isn’t sufficient. Other, later brain regions seem to be directly involved in this task, and without them, it isn’t possible, regardless of whether the optic nerves are intact. Thus, deficits from lesions to an area may be due to their disruption in larger brain networks rather than because they themselves were responsible for normal function of specific deficits. Another shortcoming is that damage to brain regions is rarely precise. When something like a stroke causes a lesion, it may damage multiple distinct regions in addition to the main region that it damages, and the same goes for experimentally induced damage, which calls into question how specific your conclusions from this method can be.

The fourth and final main method is direct stimulation of neurons in brain regions of interest. Neurosurgeon William Penfield first did this in the 1940s while performing open brain surgeries on awake subjects. When he stimulated certain parts of the somatosensory cortex, subjects reported feeling sensations at specific body regions. In different subjects, the same certain subsections of the somatosensory cortex corresponded to the same body regions. This is how the somatosensory homunculus was discovered. This approach is quite powerful, and establishes a strong causal link between region and function. However, it too has its shortcomings. First, regions don’t work in isolation in the real world, and direct stimulation of an area is an extremely artificial scenario. Under normal conditions with more natural activation patterns across the brain, the stimulated region may work differently (see [Some limits on interpreting causality in neuroscience experiments](https://medium.com/the-spike/some-limits-on-interpreting-causality-in-neuroscience-experiments-f777a63650c7)). Also, when you stimulate neurons, their postsynaptic neurons will also likely fire. The result of the stimulation may be due to the activity of the postsynaptic neurons, rather than the ones directly stimulated.

See [How to Characterize the Function of a Brain Region](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661318300238) if you want to learn more about this.
