---
layout: post
title: "Intro to Pain Science Part 2: Chronic Pain"
Image: figure.jpg
---


**Introduction: The 3 Groups of Factors have different weights in different types of pain**

The last article established 3 general groups of factors that can affect pain; noxious stimuli, psychological and contextual factors, and neurobiological modulatory mechanisms that occur independently of psychology. The first group initiates signaling, and the 2 other groups modulate how the signaling is processed, either by amplifying or dampening it. In different instances of pain, it is obvious that different weights can be given to each group of factors. In some cases, contextual or psychological factors may be responsible for virtually all of the pain (ie worker with nail through boot), and in other, very tissue dependent cases, they may have very little influence; in all but the most drastic contexts and psychological states, tearing a hamstring is going to hurt very badly, for example. People who feel severe pain when the area around an injury is brushed lightly might be experiencing this pain mainly due to peripheral and central sensitization along the ascending pathway, which did not depend on psychology.

That being said, it is likely valid to generally classify chronic pain cases into a large group. Of course there are exceptions, but most instances share the fundamental common features. In the context of chronic pain, group 1 factors are primarily long-lasting tissue damage/dysfunction. Group 2 and 3 factors are long-term changes to the pain related areas of the nervous system, dependent on or independent of psychology, respectively. These would make it such that even tiny stimuli like subtle movements could be sufficient to induce pain.

This variability between types of pain with respect to the relative weights of the 3 groups of factors raises an important question which has important treatment and management implications: In general, what are the relative weights of these 3 groups of factors in influencing chronic pain? This article seeks to answer this important question, and to offer some general treatment and management implications. Two very intriguing questions are explored afterwards.

  

**Acute Pain**

Much of what is said in this article does not apply to instances of acute pain such as sport injuries. These types of pain are typically easier to deal with and most cases are very likely to resolve in due time. This is largely due to the fact that acute injuries are usually much more dependent on tissue damage than chronic pain states (more on this later). If you want information about proper management acute injuries, see [Pain Science – Guiding the Path](https://thelogicofrehab.com/2017/09/11/pain-science-guiding-the-path/). There is a section starting with the sentence “we can’t expedite the healing process but there are a few things we can do when guiding the path of an acute injury” which outlines the general approach for dealing with acute injuries (whole article is good as well). [This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mdwj5ORPmX0) shows how this process might work in the context of a lifter who suffered an acute injury. [This article](http://teddywillsey.com/hamstring-conundrum/) outlines the process of returning an athlete to sport following a hamstring strain. The general idea is to manage relevant psychological factors (more on this later) and to quickly find a tolerable starting point for exercise level, and to gradually progress back up to previous levels of activity.

  

**Contents**

What are the relative weights of the 3 groups of factors in the development and persistence of chronic pain?

Tissue Damage/Dysfunction is Insufficient to Explain Most Cases of Chronic Pain Psychological and Contextual Factors Are Significant

Altered Signaling and Processing is Likely the most Important Factor

Treatment and Management

Treating Tissue Damage and Dysfunction

Managing Psychological and Contextual Factors

Targeting Pain Processing and Signaling

Tangents

Intriguing Questions

Is pain without nociceptor activity possible? If so, is it at all prevalent?

Is pain without ascending inputs from the spinal cord possible? If so, is it at all prevalent?

  

Experiments proving causation

Placebo and nocebo effects

  
  

**What are the relative weights of the three groups of factors in the development and persistence of chronic pain?**

As made clear by recent trends in chronic pain, things are not going so well despite widespread progress and advancements in science and technology. Many current management methods for pain (physical therapy, massage, chiropractic etc) are focused on dealing with anatomical damage/dysfunction (group 1). As we will soon see, this approach is insufficient for most cases of chronic pain. Most current drugs for pain (NSAIDS, opioids) are focused more so on addressing biological changes to processing (group 3). This general approach is likely to be much more helpful in most cases, but unfortunately truly efficacious and safe drugs do not exist right now. The problems with currently popular drugs are discussed later. Notice the lack of attention to group 2 factors (psychological and contextual). To get a better idea of what can be done about chronic pain, it is important to explore the following question: In general, what are the relative weights of these 3 groups of factors in influencing the overall pain experience in chronic pain patients?

  

**Tissue Damage/Dysfunction is Insufficient to Explain most Cases of Chronic Pain**

It seems that most chronic pain patients tend to think that their pain is predominantly due to persistent damage/dysfunction (group 1 factors). This study ([Individuals’ explanations for their persistent or recurrent low back pain: a cross-sectional survey](https://bmcmusculoskeletdisord.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12891-017-1831-7)) performed discourse analysis to see how 130 patients of chronic low back pain thought about their pain. It found the most common theme in answers to be that their pain was “due to the body being like a ‘broken machine’” This mindset is essentially stating that damage to the body (essentially a continuous noxious stimulus) is the main cause of chronic pain. This is far from surprising. As someone who has experience with debilitating chronic back pain, the idea that there is a single pathology that is responsible for your pain is a strangely tantalizing idea; it can be hard to internalize the idea that contextual and psychological factors, or even changes in neural processing have any influence. As Lorimer Moseley said in one paper ([Fifteen Years of Explaining Pain: The Past, Present, and Future](https://www.jpain.org/article/S1526-5900(15)00682-3/fulltext)), it is common for patients to say that psychological treatment and education (more on this later) “is really excellent for those who think they have pain, but it is not for me—I have real pain.” This shows a fundamental misunderstanding of pain, in that pain influenced by context and psychology is no less “real.” This also shows a heavy bias towards thinking that some sort of damage (noxious stimuli) as being the cause for pain, rather than the other groups of factors (psychological and contextual and other neurobiological changes). I can certainly see that it is hard to resist the thought that there is a single anatomical root cause of pain that can be fixed to abolish all the pain. However, as we are about to see, most people who claim that these other factors don’t affect them are wrong. Many lines of evidence support the idea that in most chronic pain states, damage is a surprisingly minor part of the picture, especially compared to most acute instances.

Right off the bat, the inherent timeframe of chronic pain casts some doubt over the idea of tissue damage being the main factor; 3 months is well beyond the normal healing time for most injuries. However, it is certainly reasonable to suspect that this persistence may just be indicative of faulty healing, or some other tissue dysfunction, so more evidence is needed.

We have abundant evidence of people having chronic pain without notable damage or dysfunction. Since low back pain is by far the most common form of chronic pain, I will use it in most examples. The vast majority ([Low back pain](https://www.thelancet.com/series/low-back-pain)) of low back pain is called “non-specific” meaning that there is no clear, identifiable pathological “driver” of the pain. Estimates are as high or higher than 90%. ([Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1479671/)). It is certainly possible, even likely, that in a portion of these cases, there is some missed primary anatomical dysfunction or pathology causing most of the nociceptive input, but with current imaging and diagnostic techniques it seems unlikely that this is a significant number. Now all this is not to say that these patients are “imagining” their pain, or something ridiculous like that. If someone feels pain, they have pain; A lack of clear damage does not mean “fake pain.” The cause of the pain does not matter with regards to suffering.

Furthermore, there is lots of good evidence that many--even most-- people without pain have what is often considered to be damage/dysfunction in their bodies. This systematic review ([Systematic Literature Review of Imaging Features of Spinal Degeneration in Asymptomatic Populations](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4464797/)) reviewed 33 studies with 3110 asymptomatic individuals, and found that “the prevalence of disk degeneration in asymptomatic individuals increased from 37% of 20-year-old individuals to 96% of 80-year-old individuals. Disk bulge prevalence increased from 30% of those 20 years of age to 84% of those 80 years of age.” This is interesting because people with low back pain often get imaging and find some sort of disc degeneration or dysfunction. Abnormalities on imaging become a scapegoat; “that is the true cause of my pain.” Now, just because it doesn’t cause pain in many people doesn’t necessarily mean that it won’t in others, but it is clear that claiming that it is the cause of pain is a hasty conclusion. Also, it is clear that disc degeneration is probably a normal part of aging, and the term degeneration is unnecessarily negative (see [Dr. Baraki on Low Back Pain at Fort Irwin (Part II)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JS5ZCCOv07c)). There is a lot of similar evidence for other injuries, especially shoulders, where asymptomatic full or partial thickness rotator cuff tears are found in a large percentage of participants, and up to 96% of participants have some sort of abnormalities. ([Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Asymptomatic Shoulder of Overhead Athletes: A 5-year Follow-Up Study](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12975193/), [Ultrasound of the Shoulder: Asymptomatic Findings in Men](https://www.ajronline.org/doi/pdf/10.2214/AJR.11.6971)). This line of evidence from asymptomatic individuals further supports the idea that in chronic pain states, pain is not a good indicator of damage. So even if these are seen on images in people with pain, they are by no means necessarily the cause of the pain. The big point is this: noxious stimuli from tissue damage and dysfunction alone is insufficient to explain these cases of pain..

Due to the mismatch between damage/dysfunction and pain, it is clear that some sensitization and modulation is going on and changes to processing have occured. Most cases of chronic pain are multifaceted; they are not as simple as damage = pain. If we view pain as an alarm system for damage, a huge portion of the problem in these cases seems to be excessive activity of the alarm system, rather than damage itself. This means that either psychological and contextual factors, changes to pain processing independent of psychological and contextual factors, or both are at play. (group 2 and 3 factors). As Greg Lehman puts it, chronic “pain is more about sensitivity than injury.” [Treatment Fundamentals: a simple framework to reconceptualize pain and injury treatment](http://www.greglehman.ca/blog/2015/02/19/treatment-fundamentals-a-simple-framework-to-reconceptualize-pain-and-injury-treatment)

It is important to note that tissue damage/dysfunction can’t just be ignored; it is likely still an important piece in most cases of chronic pain. Though abnormal imaging findings like disc degeneration can often be found in asymptomatic people, they are still positively correlated with pain, which is no surprise. ([MRI Findings of Disc Degeneration Are More Prevalent in Adults With Low Back Pain Than in Asymptomatic Controls: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26359154/)) The message here is that there is so much more going on in addition--like faulty processing that amplifies signaling. Thus, solely treating tissues in hopes of “fixing” them is unlikely to be enough to address pain.

Now the question is this: of the modulation and changes to processing that exist in chronic pain states, how much is psychologically affected?

  

**Psychological and Contextual Factors are Significant**

Note that I do not explicitly discuss contextual factors here because I have not seen much research on how they relate to chronic pain, which is to be expected. Regardless, their effects are mediated by psychological effects, so we just can think of which contextual factors in someone’s life may affect relevant psychological factors. Also, you may be wondering exactly which psychological factors we should be concerned about with respect to directly causing pain. There is no easy answer to this question. In article 1, there was direct evidence for the influence of expectations on the use of the modulatory descending pathway, but unfortunately I have not seen many other direct links between specific psychological factors and neurobiological mechanisms. It has been suggested that those that potentially increase the implicit threat of the situation should be considered as candidates ([(PDF) Reconceptualising pain according to modern pain science](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233581683_Reconceptualising_pain_according_to_modern_pain_science)). This has excellent explanatory power for many acute instances of pain that we have seen such as the builder and the nail and the people with the VAR machines; a perceived threatful situation induced more pain. However, this paradigm fails in other cases, like escaping a predator: a high threat low pain situation. This paradigm is probably better than any other generalizing statement, but on its own, it still seems too limiting. Pain is too complicated. It may be best to just remain vague and look at both factors that raise implicit threats like expectation of pain, and those that are detrimental to patients’ well being in general, like depression and stress. Trying to definitively isolate very specific psychological factors that cause chronic pain is likely impossible. It’s also unnecessary because it’s not like individual psychological factors can be treated in isolation.

It is worth noting that there are two distinct questions to discuss here: if psychological factors influence the development of chronic pain and if they contribute to the maintenance/persistence of it. However, it is almost certain that an answer to either question carries over to the other, as they are so highly related. So to keep things simple they will be discussed together for the most part.

Combining multiple lines of evidence strongly supports the idea that psychological factors can contribute to both the development and persistence of chronic pain. Looking at risk factors for the development of chronic pain is a good place to start. (This is slightly better than looking at same-time correlation studies because it rules out the possibility that the pain caused the psychological factor, which is quite plausible for some of the ones we will see like depression.) This systematic review ([https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18952472/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18952472/)) of 50 studies found that patients showing depression, psychological vulnerability, and stress were the most likely to develop chronic pain following surgery. Another one ([Psychosocial predictors in the transition from acute to chronic pain: a systematic review](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6708443/)) found that 83% of the included studies “reported an association between psychosocial factors and chronicity.” We also have data about more specific factors, like beliefs about pain. This review ([Role of kinesiophobia on pain, disability and quality of life in people suffering from chronic musculoskeletal pain: a systematic review](https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/53/9/554)) of 63 papers found that “strong evidence for an association between a greater degree of kinesiophobia and greater levels of pain intensity and disability and moderate evidence between a greater degree of kinesiophobia and higher levels of pain severity and low quality of life.” Catastrophizing is well “associated with a number of pain-related outcomes, including acute and chronic pain severity, altered CNS pain processing (e.g., diminished endogenous pain inhibition), exaggerated healthcare utilization, postsurgical pain outcomes and disability, and pain-related activity interference.”( [Pain catastrophizing: a critical review](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2696024/)  [https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20616465/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20616465/), [https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21451092/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21451092/) ) It is important to keep in mind that these reviews by themselves do not definitively show that these specific factors caused the development of chronic pain; they only show a correlation, and as we all know “correlation does not equal causation.” Having a penis at birth increases the likelihood of being taller than 5’8 in adulthood, but unless we are missing something, the penis did not cause this. A third factor causing both (being male in this example), and even random chance, could both be behind this observed correlation. And it is important to make clear that in order to make the claim that reducing psychological factors will reduce the development of chronic pain, there must be causation of the latter by the former. Observing a trend without knowing the specific causal relationship doesn’t necessarily tell you what will happen due to manipulations to the variables; the amount of firefighters at a fire is correlated with how large the fire is, but unfortunately reducing the number of firefighters will not reduce the size of the fire. There are 2 kinds of randomized trials that would be the most useful to establish a causal relationship between psychological factors and the development of chronic pain (see tangent). The first would take a large group of people who recently sustained injuries of similar magnitudes and randomize them into 2 groups. One group would be a control group with no intervention and the other would be under psychological interventions aiming to induce long term depression, stress, and bad expectations. This is obviously impossible ethically. Ideally, the opposite study could be performed, which had a control group and a treatment group where an intervention tried to prevent depression, stress, and bad expectations and the like. This would be the best evidence for psychological factors causing the development of chronic pain. But unfortunately, I have not seen a study like this. However, there are almost identical studies which pertain to psychological factors’ effects on the maintenance (rather than development) of chronic pain. Again, results from these can be extrapolated to development. It will be discussed soon.

However, it is justifiable to conclude that a general causal relationship between psychological factors and pain exists, due to a few lines of evidence. First, it seems reasonable to think that if a correlation is observed, the causal relationship established in certain cases of pain (like the experiments in article 1) can be extrapolated to chronic pain. Second, there is biological plausibility; we know mechanisms by which these factors may affect maintenance and development of chronic pain. Among these are areas of the brain involved in emotion and stress having connections to the PAG-RVM which we know sends descending neurons that can amplify or dampen ascending signals. This system may be overactive in facilitating/amplifying signals in chronic pain states. The controlled use of this pathway for inhibition is actually necessary for normal processing of nociceptive information, (WMP page 100) so loss of its use due to psychological factors could potentially also contribute. Many of the mechanisms are likely similar to those observed in the placebo and nocebo effects. (See tangent for further discussion on this, and a broader discussion of these effects.) Also, recall from article 1 that psychological factors can cause widespread, significant long-term changes in the brain. Chronic pain patients often have structural and chemical differences in brain regions, which likely contribute to their pain. All this is still not quite enough to justify the claim that psychological factors are heavily responsible for the development and maintenance of chronic pain, or that treating psychological factors will reduce pain.

Luckily, there is a much stronger line of evidence which puts this issue to rest; actual results from psychological interventions that induce positive effects/ reverse negative effects. These studies are almost identical to the study design I outlined before, but they include interventions to cure the chronic pain rather than prevent its development. They have, in general, shown respectable effects. This trial ([Efficacy of classification-based cognitive functional therapy in patients with non-specific chronic low back pain: A randomized controlled trial](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3796866/)) studied the difference between groups of chronic pain patients undergoing classification-based cognitive functional therapy (CBT), which included psychological interventions along with physical interventions against a group undergoing solely physical treatment. It found that the CB-CFT group had significantly better outcomes at both 3 and 12 month follow ups, for both pain and disability measures. At 3 months, the reduction of pain on a 10 point scale in the two groups was 2.7 and 1.4 respectively. At 12 it was 2.1 and 0.5. It is worth noting that the physical interventions in the groups were actually different, which makes the results a little bit less supporting the efficacy of psychological intervention. A meta-analysis of 27 trials on interventions like verbal suggestion used to increase patients expectations of recovery ([https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26945235/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26945235/)) found “medium to large effects on experimental and acute procedural pain and small effects on chronic pain.” The difference in benefit between acute and chronic pain states is interesting. Presumably, it is due to long term changes to processing along the pain pathway that has happened in chronic pain patients which is absent in acute patients. These may be harder to reverse. Pain education also has some decent evidence behind it. A systematic review of 8 trials ([The Effect of Neuroscience Education on Pain, Disability, Anxiety, and Stress in Chronic Musculoskeletal Pain](https://www.archives-pmr.org/article/S0003-9993(11)00670-8/abstract)) concluded that “there is compelling evidence that an educational strategy addressing neurophysiology and neurobiology of pain can have a positive effect on pain, disability, catastrophization, and physical performance.” Another one ([The efficacy of pain neuroscience education on musculoskeletal pain: A systematic review of the literature](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27351541/)) concluded that “current evidence supports the use of PNE (pain neuroscience education) for chronic MSK (musculoskeletal) disorders in reducing pain and improving patient knowledge of pain, improving function and lowering disability, reducing psychosocial factors, enhancing movement, and minimizing healthcare utilization.”

It is very clear that psychological factors play a considerable role in chronic pain.

**Modulatory Mechanisms that Occur Independently of Psychology are Likely the most Important Factor**

With all that being said, in the vast majority of cases, treating psychological factors alone is almost certainly insufficient to fully remove most cases of chronic pain. This comes from both a strong gut feeling that we likely all have and clear evidence. First, it is very hard to make lots of progress in treating psychological factors. Things like depression are notoriously difficult to manage. And in interventions targeting them, the effect sizes on pain are relatively small. Furthermore, it is likely that much/most of the changes to processing that occur in chronic pain states do not depend on psychology at all. Of the identified mechanisms for modulation outlined earlier, most are unlikely to be affected by psychology; the brain and nervous system largely operate without our conscious control. To give one example, psychology also fails to explain certain empirical observations in patients, including the fact that chronic pain patients becoming so sensitive that tiny movements or touches to the relevant area induce pain; this fact indicates sensitization of nociceptors, such that they begin to respond to lower and lower thresholds of stimuli, and also possibly rearrangements in the spinal cord that cause low-threshold touch receptors to link to ascending spinal cord neurons that typically respond to nociceptors. To my knowledge, there are no mechanisms for psychological or contextual factors inducing nociceptor sensitization, or reversing it. Do not get the wrong idea from the brevity of this section; neurobiological changes to processing are probably the most important part of most cases of chronic pain. There are likely many changes (that occur independently of psychology) in the periphery, spinal cord, and brain that all make the brain overreact and produce an exaggerated amount of pain.

Note that there is a very specific type of pain called neuropathic pain, which is a direct result of nerve damage. This type of pain seems to have specific facets that make it different from other chronic pain states. This sort of damage is kind of in a grey area with regards to the classification scheme, but to me it seems to fall more so under group 3 factors than group 1 because the resulting pain is mediated by altered signaling and processing. It can be read more about here: [Neuropathic pain](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5371025/) and [Neuropathic pain: mechanisms and their clinical implications](https://www.bmj.com/content/348/bmj.f7656).

Let’s review the 3 groups of factors and their contributions to chronic pain. We have seen that tissue damage is probably a relatively small factor in most instances of chronic pain. This leaves modulatory factors which change processing of nociception and pain as the main problem for most cases. We have seen that psychological approaches are quite effective. However, they can not even come close to completely resolving pain, and there are so many known mechanisms of increased pain sensitivity that occur regardless of psychology. Thus, it is likely that the main problem in most cases is neurobiological changes to pain processing that are not affected by psychology. (Keep in mind that the relative weights of the 3 groups vary by case. These are general statements.) Now lets see the treatment and management implications of this knowledge.

  

**Treatment and Management**

It is certainly great to learn about how pain works, but of course it is also crucial to learn what can be done about it. Education about pain science must be translated into more effective action. Unfortunately, at this point in time, we do not have outstanding methods to treat chronic pain. Much more basic research and clinical trials are needed. To make things more complicated, completely removing pain, which would actually probably be easier than delicately normalizing amplified processing (lesioning important neurons in the pain system like all ascending spinal cord neurons could probably remove pain, for example. See tangent 2 for a discussion on this), is a horrible option; pain is a necessary protective mechanism (see the tangent on this topic in article 1). Thus, in developing new treatment and management methods, the approach must ideally be powerful enough to significantly mitigate pain, yet elegant enough to preserve the protective value of pain. We must wait for such good treatment options to become a reality.

However, there is a strong case to be made that people with chronic pain can be “successful” without ridding themselves of pain entirely ([Successful living: redefining living with chronic pain](https://www.mycuppajo.com/successful-living/), more on this later). There are things that can be done right now to improve both pain and overall quality of life, and some things that should be avoided. In this section, I would like to provide some broad logical conclusions about management and treatment from what has been learned so far and connect those that are implementable right now to recommendations for treatment and management from this systematic review ([What does best practice care for musculoskeletal pain look like? Eleven consistent recommendations from high-quality clinical](https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/bjsports/54/2/79.full.pdf)) of 44 sets of evidence based clinical practice guidelines for musculoskeletal pain. Clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) are evidence based recommendations designed by specialists to inform and guide clinician practices for specific conditions. We will see that this set of guidelines for pain are remarkably consistent with and follow logically from the pain science that I have laid out so far. Unfortunately, there is much evidence that they are not being followed closely.

Note that one of the guidelines is to screen for red flag conditions like malignancies, fractures, and infections, to rule out serious pathologies. These are important to consider due to their potential for large detrimental effects on health. The overwhelming majority of patients will not have these, but they are very important to rule out.

In the following sections, I break up this discussion into the 3 groups of relevant factors that have been used throughout these articles.

  

**Treating Tissue Damage and Dysfunction**

We have seen that contrary to most people’s intuitions, tissue damage and dysfunction is unlikely to be the main factor in most cases of chronic pain. Also, even if there are significant tissue problems, most treatments are unlikely to be too effective in dealing with them. The body is quite good at healing itself given sufficient time, and evidence for many common treatments geared directly towards tissues is lacking. For example, manual therapies and surgery are both extremely dubious practices for chronic pain. An overview on the shortcomings of popular manual therapies and surgeries for pain can be found in this excellent article: ([https://startingstrength.com/contentfiles/aches_and_pains.pdf](https://startingstrength.com/contentfiles/aches_and_pains.pdf)). Consistent with this evidence are the following 2 guidelines: “Use manual therapy only as an adjunct to other treatments”, and “offer high-quality non-surgical care prior to surgery.”

The article linked above also discusses imaging, and discourages its frequent use. Between 25% and 42% of patients with low back pain undergo imaging. Even higher percentages exist for other conditions. As we saw earlier, most asymptomatic people can have pretty ugly imaging results. But when a person in pain sees these results, it is hard to resist using the image as a scapegoat. This has the potential to give rise to potent nocebo effects, and give the patient the impression that their body is “broken.” This will be discussed further in the next section. Also, imaging is expensive, so it is best to avoid excessive use of it. Consistent with these points is the following guideline: “Radiological imaging is discouraged unless: (1) serious pathology is suspected, (2) there has been an unsatisfactory response to conservative care or unexplained progression of signs and symptoms or (3) imaging is likely to change management.”

There is one treatment method that can be seen as tissue-focused that is almost certainly helpful for most cases of pain: exercise. In many cases, the effects of exercise on chronic pain don’t even seem to be necessarily dependent on it targeting specific regions, so it may not be accurate to call it a purely tissue focused method. Regardless, while further evidence is needed for direct effects on pain, “available evidence suggests physical activity and exercise is an intervention with few adverse events that may improve pain severity and physical function, and consequent quality of life.” ([Physical Activity and Exercise for Chronic Pain in Adults: An Overview of Cochrane Reviews](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28436583/)) Beyond pain, it is universally known that exercise has a massive range of positive effects ([Benefits of Physical Activity | Physical Activity](https://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/basics/pa-health/index.htm)), and is one of the most important components of a healthy lifestyle. Also, the potential for it to aid in improving psychological factors such as self-efficacy and kinesiophobia makes it a great option to improve mental health as well. The importance of these factors will be further discussed in the next section. Consistent with this is the guideline to “provide management addressing physical activity and/or exercise.”

There exists little evidence that favors specific forms of exercise over others, so whatever a patient prefers is probably more than ok. Of course, graded exposure with exercise must be used. It takes time for the body to adapt to physical stress, and it would be unwise to immediately jump into strenuous activities. It is wise to find a tolerable entry point, and gradually progress up to the intensity of the activities the person wants to be doing.

  

**Managing Psychological and Contextual Factors**

Earlier, in making my case for the significance of psychological factors in most cases of chronic pain, I reviewed much evidence for the potential significance of these factors on pain itself. It is clear that managing and treating these factors can have a quite significant effect on patients’ pain. Again, it is hard to isolate very specific factors due to the complexity of psychology, but the evidence seems to suggest that factors like kinesiophobia and catastrophizing and very general factors like depression and stress are relevant. Also, getting too specific is not important because psychological treatments can’t even get that specific.

There is another major side to managing these factors: mental health. For the sake of overall mental health, it is important for pain sufferers to manage general psychological factors like stress and depression and contexts that influence these, and also to learn about pain. I don’t need to tell you that eliminating chronic stress and depression is good, so I will focus specifically on pain education. As we saw, many chronic pain sufferers believe that their bodies are like “a broken machine.” There is also no shortage of anecdotes of people being told by doctors that they cannot live normally due to back problems, and that they must live under constant hypervigilance, because one false move could cause them to “blow out their back” and become even more disabled. As you can imagine, this is a severe threat to mental health. Again as we have seen, for the vast majority of people, these beliefs are unfounded. The pain itself may be severe, but there is likely very little damage/dysfunction causing it. Furthermore, things that show up on imaging may not actually be problems at all, as evidenced by the large amounts of asymptomatic people with them. Instead, their nervous system has become very inclined to amplify nociceptive signaling and induce pain. Learning about the science of pain is likely to remedy these misconceptions and the debilitating beliefs they generate, such as the perceived need to move slowly and carefully to avoid damage. Even though the pain is likely to persist, it is certainly reassuring to not fear destroying your body every time you move.

Thus, basic education about pain science is an integral part of treatment, both because of its effects on pain itself, and on patient mental health. This is consistent with the recommendations to “assess psychosocial factors” and “provide patients with education/information.” To the degree that this is possible, it is likely a good idea to modify contexts that affect relevant psychological factors that someone is in frequently. Also, it may be a good idea for sufferers of chronic pain to make note of personal trends with their pain. For example, someone may notice that whenever they are very sleep deprived, their pain levels increase. For this person, it might be in their best interests for pain management to avoid missing out on sleep.

Unfortunately, there is evidence that education is not being provided to patients. This 2010 survey of general practitioners ([Low Back Pain and Best Practice Care: A Survey of General Practice Physicians | Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology | JAMA Internal Medicine](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/415588)) found that only 20.5% of them provided advice and education to pain patients. This must change, as it is likely the most important step that can actually be taken right now in pain management.

  

**Targeting Pain Processing and Signaling**

For most cases, it seems that directly altering processing of pain signaling would be the most effective treatment. It is important to note that even if a modulatory mechanism is affected by psychology, it can still be dealt with by direct neurobiological methods. An effective way to normalize pain processing would be absolutely huge for chronic pain. Unfortunately, as of right now, efficacious methods for modulating processing are lacking. Opioids work in the brain, spinal cord, and periphery to dampen pain signaling. They ([Opioids for Chronic Aches & Pains: The Nuclear Option](https://www.painscience.com/articles/opioids-for-chronic-musculoskeletal-pain.php)) can be quite effective at high doses, but are extremely addictive and dangerous, partially due to their widespread effects all across the body (receptors exist in many body regions, and do not solely affect pain.) They are most often not worth the risks associated with them. 67,000 people died in the US in 2018 due to opioid overdose. Also, opioid withdrawal is --in a word--hell, and they can reduce the body's natural ability to inhibit pain. This is likely partially due to neurons reducing the number of opioid receptors they express after prolonged exposure to opioids. Many other mechanisms are likely involved. (WMP chapter 30, [A comprehensive review of opioid-induced hyperalgesia](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21412369/))

Milder drugs are not good options for chronic pain either. NSAIDs like advil and aleve, which primarily target inflammation, ([https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26863524/?from_term=nsaids+chronic+pain&from_filter=pubt.meta-analysis&from_filter=pubt.systematicreviews&from_pos=4](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26863524/?from_term=nsaids+chronic+pain&from_filter=pubt.meta-analysis&from_filter=pubt.systematicreviews&from_pos=4)) barely beat placebo for chronic low back pain. These results are to be expected, as inflammation is unlikely to play a significant role in most cases of chronic pain. This systematic review on tylenol ([https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26572078/?from_term=tylenol+chronic+pain&from_filter=pubt.meta-analysis&from_filter=pubt.systematicreviews&from_pos=3](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26572078/?from_term=tylenol+chronic+pain&from_filter=pubt.meta-analysis&from_filter=pubt.systematicreviews&from_pos=3)) found “no or little efficacy with dubious clinical relevance” for chronic pain. There are many other methods that are not uncommon including injections, denervations and nerve blocks. There is some evidence for their efficacy in some pain states, which will be discussed later (see tangent 2), but overall there is not enough evidence to conclude that they are efficacious or entirely safe.

As of right now, it is unrealistic for most chronic pain patients to expect to be able to quickly get rid of their pain somehow. The bottom line is that we need better targeted drugs and methods that are more efficacious and safer to better be able to handle chronic pain. In the future, this may be done very specifically, as in targeting specific modulatory mechanisms that have occurred, or more generally, with methods that will effectively neutralize many of them. It seems that the latter is probably more realistic for the near future due to its efficiency and the problems that individual variance causes with the first option. Different people may have different specific mechanisms mediating their increased sensitivity. This approach will likely attempt to target neurons that are crucial in the pain system such as nociceptors or ascending spinal cord neurons, and make them less excitable. Again, we will have to be patient for an effective approach to be invented.

It sounds pretty depressing that most people who are experiencing chronic pain will likely have to continue to live with it for at least a while. However, even with pain, people can live meaningful and happy lives. This [excellent article](https://www.mycuppajo.com/successful-living/) (whole site is really good) argues that we ought to redefine success with chronic pain. Victory ought not to be defined as escaping pain; we should “call it a win if we are more [accepting of our pain](http://www.mycuppajo.com/acceptance/), struggling with it less, catastrophizing less, less fearful, less anxious, less depressed, more active, or more engaged with the world again.” All of these outcomes are achievable.

  

**Summary of Topics and Points Covered**

-In different cases of pain, different weights can be assigned to each of the three groups of factors. It is important to explore what the weights are in most cases of chronic pain

-Tissue damage or dysfunction are insufficient to explain most cases of chronic pain. This means that modulation of processing is playing a large role, and tissue-focused treatments are unlikely to be too effective

-Some of the altered processing of nociception and pain in most chronic pain sufferers is directly psychologically influenced, but most is not

-Unfortunately, at this point in time it is unrealistic for most chronic pain patients to be able to quickly eliminate their pain. However, with appropriate action, quality of life can be improved dramatically.

-Many treatment methods for pain are nonsense. People should do their research and be skeptical of big claims.

-The vast majority of people should exercise regularly, both for a wide range of general health benefits, and positive effects on pain. It is important for everyone to find an appropriate, individualized level of activity

-Evidence suggests that treating psychological factors is an important part of pain treatment/management, both for pain itself and for overall well-being. Along with exercise, this is the largest step that can be taken right now for most people.

-Evidence and intuition also suggest that treating these factors is not enough. We need better drugs with less side effects and other methods to manage pain processing, and research will take us there, hopefully in the near future.

-Pain sufferers can live full, meaningful lives. For now, success ought not to be defined as escaping pain, but living well with it

  

Extra Helpful Resources:

Great site with lots of helpful info about living with pain: [MyCuppaJo.com](https://www.mycuppajo.com/)

Excellent Resource for Lifters: [Pain in training: What do?](https://www.barbellmedicine.com/blog/pain-in-training-what-do/) (whole site/company is good)

2 podcast episodes on treatment and management

[https://soundcloud.com/bmjpodcasts/effective-treatments-for-back-pain-kieran-osullivans-practical-tips-within-a-guiding-framework?in=bmjpodcasts/sets/bjsm-1#t=0:00](https://soundcloud.com/bmjpodcasts/effective-treatments-for-back-pain-kieran-osullivans-practical-tips-within-a-guiding-framework?in=bmjpodcasts/sets/bjsm-1#t=0:00)

[Dr Kieran O’Sullivan on managing back pain: 7 habits of highly effective clinicians. Part 2, 2016](https://soundcloud.com/bmjpodcasts/dr-kieran-osullivan-on-managing-back-pain-7-habits-of-highly-effective-clinicians-part-2-2016)

Paper Discussing the Development of Chronic Pain: [The Transition of Acute Postoperative Pain to Chronic Pain: An Integrative Overview of Research on Mechanisms](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27908839/)

Nice overview of pain: [(PDF) Reconceptualising pain according to modern pain science](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233581683_Reconceptualising_pain_according_to_modern_pain_science)

  

**Tangents (Optional to Read)**

Tangent 1: Experiments Proving Causation

Causation is a pretty philosophical topic if you dive into it. ([https://www.google.com/books/edition/An_Enquiry_Concerning_Human_Understandin/IR7XAAAAMAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&printsec=frontcover](https://www.google.com/books/edition/An_Enquiry_Concerning_Human_Understandin/IR7XAAAAMAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&printsec=frontcover), [Hume, David: Causation](https://www.iep.utm.edu/hume-cau/)) I will stay less philosophical here, but it's a nice rabbit hole to get into.

I have talked in this article about randomized experiments being able to prove causation, while simple correlational studies can’t. Some people might not have a good feeling for why, and this is just the way I like to think of it.

For any given correlation between A and B, there are generally 4 possible reasons for it: 1. A causes B 2. B causes A 3. C causes A and B 4. Random chance

(Apparently there are actually some very rare exceptions to this, but I have not fully wrapped my head around these.) Random chance can usually be ruled out if there is a sufficient sample size and replication. In a correlational study, we observe a relationship between A and B, without manipulating anything. Correlational studies typically leave options 1, 2 and 3 on the table. More data and information is needed to establish a specific causal relationship. If we use a study looking for predictors like I discussed in the body of the article, either option 1 or 2 can be ruled out because whichever A or B occurred first could not be caused by the other. But the possibility of a third variable causing both A and B cannot be ruled out without more information, or an experiment. Back when people first started protesting about cigarettes, claiming they caused lung cancer, famous statisticians including Fischer, the father of statistics and a biologist, actually discounted this causal relationship by claiming that there could be a third variable that causes both an increased propensity to smoke, and an increased chance of developing lung cancer. If this were true, stopping smoking would have no effect on lung cancer.

But true randomized experiments can narrow down all the way to one possibility (unless it's some super rare case). Let’s say A is the independent variable and B is the dependent variable. It can obviously rule out option 2 due to the temporal relationship. More interestingly, it can rule out option 3 as well. This is because in experiments, the researchers randomly assign groups (which effectively spreads C, if it exists, evenly between groups) and then cause A. This is the key; we know that C does not cause A and B, because THE RESEARCHERS caused A by assigning it to one group. C didn’t; it was the same in both groups due to randomization, and therefore differences between the groups cannot be attributed to it. This rules out possibility 3. If B ensues, it can be almost absolutely certain that A caused it. This might be confusing without an example.

Here’s an example from pain. Say we see a correlation between people listening to calming music for an hour a day (A) and reporting less pain in response to a standardized stimulus (B). We cannot conclude from this that listening to calming music for an hour a day causes less of a response to this noxious stimulus; perhaps a third factor like having a life that is stress-free enough to take the time to relax and enjoy music for an hour a day (C ) causes both A and B. This is certainly plausible. But, let’s say we take a big randomly selected group, and randomly assign them into two groups, forcing one to listen to classical music for an hour a day and another to listen to none. This means that if some C exists, (like people who regularly listen having lower stress levels) it is now equally represented in both the music group and the no music group. Let’s say that the correlation between A and B persists when we retest. This means that C did (lower stress levels) and did not cause both. Thus, we can conclude that A causes B.

Hopefully this wasn’t too confusing. Just the way I like to think about causation.

Also note that this study design is very imperfect. Don’t analyze it too deeply, I just want to illustrate the logic for why causation can be inferred.

Note that the experiments cited in article 1 actually take a different path of establishing causation then the randomized control trial. They essentially use the logic that if 2 sets of circumstances are the exact same except for one factor, differences in outcome can be attributed to that difference in circumstance. For example, a red vs blue light are the differences in circumstances, and the difference in outcome (pain rating) is directly caused by this difference of light color (indirectly, they are actually caused by the psychological factors the different colors cause)

  

Tangent: 2 Intriguing Questions

In progress

  
  

Tangent 3: The Placebo and Nocebo Effects are Simultaneously Overhyped and Amazing (they are especially impressive for pain)

These effects are also their own whole rabbit hole, and I will not dive too deep here. If you are interested in the effects in general, and their many nuances, see this article ([Placebo, Are You There?](https://sciencebasedmedicine.org/placebo-are-you-there/)). This article discusses their relationships specifically to pain ([http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/i/i_03/i_03_p/i_03_p_dou/i_03_p_dou.html#1](http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/i/i_03/i_03_p/i_03_p_dou/i_03_p_dou.html#1)) I will list a few important points about the placebo effect. (These points also apply to the nocebo effect)

  

-The response in a placebo group is not necessarily the effect of the placebo treatment.

“The truth is that the placebo effect is counterfeited by a variety of factors including the natural history of the disease, regression to the mean, concomitant treatments, obliging reports, experimental subordination, severe methodological defects in the studies, misquotations, etc;”

To truly find the effect of the placebo treatment itself, you have to compare the placebo group to a no treatment group, and even then there are potential problems as discussed in [Placebo Power Hype: Not So Powerful After All?](https://www.painscience.com/articles/placebo-power-hype.php)  (another great article.)

-In general, placebos have weak clinical effects, and “outside the setting of clinical trials, there is no justification for the use of placebos.” ([Is the Placebo Powerless? — An Analysis of Clinical Trials Comparing Placebo with No Treatment](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200105243442106)) A more recent rerun ([https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20091554/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20091554/) ) by the same authors found the same thing, but noted that “However, in certain settings placebo interventions can influence patient-reported outcomes, especially pain and nausea.”

-There are certain trends going around in certain communities that the placebo effect exploits some sort of magical natural healing powers latent in all of us. They claim that if some treatment is as good as a placebo, it should be seen as legit. In general, this is BS.

-Another point worth mentioning is that terminology regarding placebo effects is messy and very confusing. I will just say here that there is no one single placebo effect. Different cases involve drastically different biological mechanisms, for example.

While the placebo effect is often overhyped, there are certain instances in which placebo effects can be quite amazing, including pain. ([A Comparison of Placebo Effects in Clinical Analgesic Trials Versus Studies of Placebo Analgesia](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12406519/)). The fact that the placebo effect works quite well in pain further supports the idea that treating psychological factors will be efficacious; the placebo treatment can essentially be seen as a type of dishonest psychological treatment. The main factors contributing to the actual effect due to the placebo treatment with respect to pain are conditioning/learning (see subtangent) and expectation of relief (or in nocebo, expectation of sensitization/worsening.) Some general biological mechanisms are known. The endogenous opioid system is clearly involved. This pioneering study ([The mechanism of placebo analgesia](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/80579/)) found that following getting their molars removed, some of the patients given saline (placebo) reported the same amount of pain as patients given morphine. But when given naloxone, an antagonist of opioids which blocks their actions by occupying their receptors, these patients reported more pain. Patients who were not responsive to the saline reported no difference due to naloxone administration. This is strong evidence that the expectations of relief from patients actually recruited the endogenous opioid system to reduce pain. Recall from article 1 that the descending pathway to the spinal cord is involved. Opioids may work through this route. However, there is more to the story than just endogenous opioids. This study ([Placebo and naloxone can alter post-surgical pain by separate mechanisms](https://www.nature.com/articles/306264a0)) found “that placebo analgesia can occur after blockade of opioid mechanisms by naloxone.” Other systems involving dopamine and serotonin are also thought to be involved. ([THE BRAIN FROM TOP TO BOTTOM](http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/a/a_03/a_03_p/a_03_p_dou/a_03_p_dou.html)). It is likely that transient changes in the way that the nervous system processes noxious stimuli and nociception also occur to cause placebo and nocebo effects.

Some other systems, including, the immune, and endocrine systems, seem very influenced by psychology and the placebo/nocebo effect. For example, this recent study [Learning one’s genetic risk changes physiology independent of actual genetic risk](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-018-0483-4) showed that when people were told that they had high-risk genetic profiles for satiety or exercise capacity both perceived poorer outcomes (ie more hunger, more exhaustion) and exhibited objectively measurable changes in relevant physiological measures such as hormone levels associated with satiety and lower max CO2:O2 exchange rate. This is the article from which I discovered this study. [Genetics-Based Expectations Affect Your Physiology • Stronger by Science](https://www.strongerbyscience.com/genetics-expectations/). This is just one example of many; it is well established that thoughts can have objective influences on physiology.
